Luke Skywalker is a fictional character and the main protagonist of the original film trilogy of the Star Wars franchise created by George Lucas.
Portrayed by Mark Hamill, Luke first appeared in Star Wars (1977), and he returned in The Empire Strikes Back (1980) and Return of the Jedi (1983).
Three decades later, Hamill returned as Luke in the Star Wars sequel trilogy, appearing in all three films: The Force Awakens (2015),
The Last Jedi (2017), and The Rise of Skywalker (2019).
He reprised the role in The Mandalorian episode "Chapter 16:
The Rescue" (2020), voicing the character that was portrayed by a body double with digital de-aging.

Originally a farmer on Tatooine living with his uncle and aunt, Luke becomes a pivotal figure in the Rebel Alliance's struggle against the Galactic Empire.
The son of fallen Jedi Knight Anakin Skywalker (turned Sith Lord Darth Vader) and Padmé Amidala, Luke is the twin brother of Rebellion leader Princess Leia and eventual brother-in-law of the smuggler Han Solo.
Luke trains to be a Jedi under Jedi Masters Obi-Wan Kenobi and Yoda, and rebuilds the Jedi Order.
He later trains his nephew, Ben Solo, and mentors Rey.
Though Luke dies at the end of The Last Jedi, he returns as a Force spirit in The Rise of Skywalker, encouraging Rey to face her grandfather, the resurrected Darth Sidious.
At the end of the film, the spirits of Luke and Leia give Rey their blessing to adopt the Skywalker surname and continue their family's legacy.

The character also briefly appears in the prequel film Episode III – Revenge of the Sith as an infant.
In the de-canonized Star Wars Expanded Universe (renamed Legends), Luke is a main character in many stories set after Return of the Jedi, which depict him as a powerful Jedi Master, the husband of Mara Jade, father of Ben Skywalker and maternal uncle of Jaina, Jacen and Anakin Solo.

==
Appearances ==


===
Skywalker saga ===


====
Original trilogy ====
In the original Star Wars trilogy, Luke Skywalker represents the hero archetype of "the young man, called to adventure, the hero going out facing the trials and ordeals, and coming back after his victory with a boon for the community".

===== A New Hope (1977) =====
In a deleted scene preceding the character's first appearance in the film (preserved in the film's radio dramatization), Luke says goodbye to his best friend Biggs Darklighter, who has just joined the Imperial Academy.
His childhood friends disparagingly call him "Wormie".
In the original 1977 film (later having the extended title, A New Hope), Luke lives at a moisture farm on the desert planet of Tatooine with his Uncle Owen and Aunt Beru.
Luke takes his first steps toward his destiny when he purchases the droids C-3PO and
R2-D2.
While examining R2-D2, he sees a message from Princess Leia Organa of Alderaan.
When R2-D2 goes missing, Luke goes out to search for the droid, and is saved from a band of Tusken Raiders by Obi-Wan Kenobi, an old hermit.
Luke and Obi-Wan retreat to the latter’s home, and R2-D2 plays the full message for Obi-Wan from Leia, beseeching him to help her defeat the Galactic Empire.
Obi-Wan says that he and Luke's father were once Jedi Knights, and that his father was murdered by a traitorous Jedi named Darth Vader.
Obi-Wan presents Luke with his father's lightsaber and offers to take him to Alderaan and train him in the ways of the Force, but Luke declines his offer, feeling obligated to continue farming for his uncle.

Luke changes his mind when he returns home to find out that Imperial stormtroopers have raided the moisture farm, killing his aunt and uncle while away.
He and Obi-Wan then travel to Mos Eisley, where they meet smugglers Han Solo and Chewbacca at a cantina.
They team up and travel on the Millennium Falcon to Alderaan, only to find out that it has been destroyed by the Death Star.
The Falcon is brought into the Star's hangar bay via tractor beam, where Luke and Han disguise themselves and infiltrate the station.
When they discover Princess Leia is there, Luke persuades a reluctant Han and Chewbacca to help rescue her.
Obi-Wan deactivates the tractor beam, and he later sacrifices his life in a duel with Vader, so that Luke and his friends can board the Falcon and escape.

During the Battle of Yavin, Luke joins the Rebel Alliance in attacking the Death Star.
In the trench leading to the Death Star's exhaust port, Luke hears Obi-Wan's voice, telling him to "trust his feelings"; he takes Obi-Wan's advice and switches off his X-wing's missile guidance system, instead using the Force to guide the missiles and destroy the Death Star.
In the film's final scene, he joins Han and Chewbacca in receiving a medal of honor for his heroism.

=====
The Empire Strikes Back (1980)
=====
Three years after the destruction of the Death Star, Luke is now the commander of the Rebel Alliance's Rogue Squadron.
While on a mission on the ice planet Hoth, he is captured by a wampa, but manages to escape using his lightsaber.
In the frozen wasteland, he sees Obi-Wan's Force ghost, who tells him to travel to the planet Dagobah and complete his training with the Jedi Master Yoda.
Luke collapses but is later rescued by Han.
When the Empire discovers the Rebel base on Hoth, Luke leads his squadron of Snowspeeders to battle the enemy’s AT-ATs, but he is forced to retreat when his wingmen are overwhelmed.
Escaping in his X-wing, he travels to Dagobah and meets Yoda.
He undergoes rigorous Jedi training, quickly increasing his power in the Force.

During his training, Luke sees a vision of his friends in danger.
Against both Obi-Wan and Yoda's advice to stay and complete his training, he travels to Bespin to save them, unwittingly falling into a trap placed by Darth Vader.
He engages in a lightsaber duel with Vader.
As his mentors warned, Luke proves to be no match for Vader; the Sith Lord easily overpowers Luke and severs his right hand.
Vader then reveals that he is Luke's father, and offers him the chance to turn to the dark side of the Force and rule the galaxy at his side.
Resolving that he would rather die than become an agent of evil, Luke throws himself into a deep reactor chasm.
He survives, but is pulled into a garbage chute to the underside of Cloud City, and left hanging perilously onto a vane rod.
Leia, flying away from Cloud City in the Millennium Falcon, senses Luke's call out to her with the Force, and turns the ship around to save him.
Aboard the ship, he hears Vader telepathically telling him that it is his destiny to join the dark side.
Luke's severed hand is replaced with a bio-mechanical one.

=====
Return of the Jedi (1983) =====
One year after the invasion on Bespin, Luke is now a Jedi Knight, and has constructed his own lightsaber.
He returns to Tatooine with Leia, the droids, and Lando Calrissian to save Han, frozen in carbonate, from the crime lord Jabba the Hutt.
Luke offers to negotiate with Jabba, who rejects his offer and casts him into a pit to battle a rancor.
When Luke kills the rancor, he is sentenced to death in the Sarlacc Pit.
Luke escapes with R2-D2's help, saving his friends and destroying Jabba's sail barge.

Luke returns to Dagobah, and learns from a dying Yoda that Vader is indeed his father.
Luke then learns from Obi-Wan's spirit that he has a twin sister, whom he immediately realizes is princess Leia.
Both Jedi Masters tell Luke that he must face Vader again to finish his training and save the galaxy, but he is disturbed by the idea of killing his own father.

Arriving on Endor as part of a Rebel commando squad, Luke surrenders to Vader in an attempt to bring his father back from the dark side of the Force.
Vader brings Luke to the second Death Star orbiting around Endor, where his master, the Emperor, tries to tempt Luke to the dark side, revealing his plan to destroy the Rebel fleet.
Luke, enraged at the thought of losing his friends, lashes out at the Emperor with his lightsaber, but Vader blocks his strike, and father and son once again duel with each other.
Luke regains control of his emotions until Vader senses that Luke has a sister, and threatens to turn her to the dark side if Luke will not submit.
Luke snaps and overpowers Vader, severing his father's mechanical right hand.
The Emperor orders Luke to kill Vader and then take his place.
Luke looks at his own bionic hand and realizes that he is on the verge of suffering his father's fate.
He casts his lightsaber aside, declaring himself a Jedi.

Furious, the Emperor tortures Luke with Force lightning.
In agony, Luke calls out to his father for help; unwilling to let his son die, Vader throws the Emperor down a reactor shaft, but is mortally wounded by the Emperor's Force lightning in the process.
As Rebel fighters head toward the second Death Star's main reactor, Luke removes Vader's mask and looks upon his father's real face for the first and last time.
The redeemed Anakin Skywalker reassures Luke that there was good in him after all before dying, and to tell his sister that he was right about him.
On Endor, Luke burns his father's armor and prosthetics on a funeral pyre, giving him a proper Jedi funeral.
During the Rebels' victory celebrations on Endor, Luke sees his father's spirit appear alongside those of Obi-Wan and Yoda.

====
Prequel
trilogy ====
=====
Revenge of the Sith (2005) =====
In the prequel film Revenge of the Sith (2005), during the waning days of the  Clone Wars between the Galactic Republic and the Separatists, Senator Padmé Amidala, wife of Anakin Skywalker, becomes pregnant to Luke and his twin sister Leia.
Foreseen fear of Padmé dying from the birth of Luke and Leia becomes a primary catalyst into Anakin's fall to the dark side as Darth Vader by Darth Sidious, who had secretly orchestrated the Clone Wars from both sides in order to transform the democratic Galactic Republic into the autocratic Galactic Empire mere days before Luke's birth.
After being Force-choked by Vader, Padmé is taken to Polis Massa, where she gives birth to Luke and Leia and dies, having lost the will to live.
At the time, Vader was not aware that Padmé had given birth to twins, believing that he killed her out of his anger.
After the twins are separated in order to be protected from the Sith, Luke is taken by Obi-Wan Kenobi to the desert planet Tatooine, where he is adopted by his father's stepbrother, Owen Lars, and his wife, Beru.
The infant Luke is portrayed by Aidan Barton, the son of Roger Barton, an editor of the film.

====
Sequel
trilogy ====
=====
The Force Awakens (2015) =====
In the first installment of the sequel trilogy, The Force Awakens (2015), the opening crawl reveals that Luke Skywalker had mysteriously vanished some time in the thirty years after the destruction of the second Death Star.
Luke went into hiding after his nephew and apprentice, Ben Solo, turned to the dark side and was later dubbed Kylo Ren.
When Ren killed all of his fellow apprentices and ushered in the despotic reign of the First Order, Luke felt responsible, and disappeared.
At the end of the film, the Resistance manage to reconstruct a map, which traces the location of the temple from the Empire's archives to his location, and he is subsequently found on the planet
Ahch-To by the young scavenger, Rey, who presents him with the lightsaber previously wielded by both Luke and his father.

The Art of Star Wars:
The Last Jedi notes that Luke's exile is a reversal from his decision to help his friends in The Empire Strikes Back.

=====
The Last Jedi (2017) =====
In The Last Jedi (2017), Luke throws the lightsaber away after being given it by Rey.
He then seals himself in his home, refusing to talk with Rey.
However, when he sees Chewbacca without Han Solo and that Rey came on the Millennium Falcon, he inquires about what has gone on with his family.
Rey informs Luke about Solo's death at the hands of Kylo Ren and that the First Order has risen to rule the galaxy.
Rey asks Luke to train her in the ways of the Force.
Luke is initially reluctant to train Rey, telling her that it is time for the Jedi Order to end.

After some persuasion from R2-D2, Luke starts training Rey, originally for the purpose of showing her why the Jedi Order needs to end, but grows increasingly afraid of her power.
Luke then tells Rey the history of the Jedi Order, how Darth Sidious rose to power and how the Jedi were partly responsible for Darth Vader's rise.
Luke also initially tells Rey that Kylo was corrupted by Supreme Leader Snoke and that when he confronted his nephew, he retaliated by destroying his Jedi temple.
This is proven false, however, and, after a furious moment with his new apprentice, Luke tells Rey that he had briefly considered killing the sleeping Ben after seeing a vision of the destruction he could cause, but immediately relented; Ben woke to see Luke with his lightsaber drawn and turned to the dark side because he felt betrayed.
Upon learning this, Rey urges Luke to help her redeem Ben, but he refuses to participate in this nor help the Resistance, saying, "This is NOT going to go the way you think.
"
When Rey leaves, an embittered Luke tries to burn the Jedi temple next to his home on Ahch-To, but fails and is visited by the spirit of Yoda, who assures Luke that he still has a purpose.

Luke appears on the planet Crait, as the Resistance are staging a standoff against the First Order, and he apologizes to Leia for allowing Ben to fall to the dark side.
Luke steps in front of the First Order's artillery, and unexpectedly survives an onslaught of blaster fire ordered by Ren.
Ren charges at Luke in hand-to-hand combat, seemingly bisecting him with his lightsaber, but Luke remains unscathed;
still on Ahch-To, Luke has sent a projection of himself to Crait, using the Force.
This distraction allows the Resistance to escape the planet.
Luke tells Kylo that he will not be the last Jedi before his projection disappears.
On Ahch-To, Luke collapses then looks off in the horizon to see the planet's two suns setting before he becomes one with the Force and vanishes.

=====
The Rise of Skywalker (2019) =====
Luke appears briefly in The Rise of Skywalker, the ninth and final chapter of the series.
When Rey discovers her lineage as the granddaughter of Darth Sidious, she exiles herself on Ahch-To as Luke did.
Meaning to isolate herself, she throws Luke's lightsaber towards the burning wreckage of Kylo Ren's TIE whisper she had traveled there with.
Luke appears as a Force spirit, and reprimands Rey for treating the lightsaber with disrespect just as he did.
Luke then admits that he was wrong to not participate in the Resistance, and thanks Rey for helping him rediscover himself.
Luke convinces Rey to not view herself as a Palpatine, but as the good person Leia saw her as when training her, and not to give up on her battle against the Sith Lord.
Luke lends Rey his old T-65B X-wing and tells Rey to combine his father's lightsaber with Leia's old lightsaber in her battle on Exegol.

After Rey vanquishes Sidious once and for all, she visits the moisture farm on Tatooine where Luke was raised.
She buries Luke and Leia's lightsabers, revealing that she has constructed her own.
A local asks Rey who she is.
As Leia, who died earlier, and Luke appear as Force spirits, Rey names herself Rey Skywalker.

===
Television series ===
At the end of the Star Wars Rebels episode "Twin Suns", a silhouette of Luke Skywalker is seen from afar by Obi-Wan Kenobi.
Luke appears in the animated Disney micro-series Star Wars Forces of Destiny (with Mark Hamill once again reprising his role).
The episode "The Path Ahead" details him training with Yoda on Dagobah.
He also appears in the episode "Traps and Tribulations", which takes place shortly after the Battle of Endor and shows him and Leia assisting the Ewoks in stopping a rampaging monster known as a Gorax.
Luke appears in the season 2 finale of The Mandalorian after making contact with Grogu through The Force in "Chapter 14:
The Tragedy".
In "Chapter 16: The Rescue", he arrives on Moff Gideon's cruiser and destroys all Dark Troopers in aid of Grogu, Din Djarin and his companions.
He then takes Grogu with him to train him in his New Jedi Order with Djarin's permission.

===
Video games ===
Luke is a playable character in Star Wars Battlefront II, and in the online multiplayer of Star Wars Battlefront.

===
Literature ===
Luke is the main character of the novel Heir to the Jedi and the junior novel
The Legends of Luke Skywalker (the latter of which was adapted as a manga).
He is also a main character of the 2015 comic Star Wars, which takes place between the films of the original trilogy.

====
Heir to the Jedi ====
Star Wars:
Heir to the Jedi was announced as one of the first four canon novels to be released in 2014 and 2015.
Set between A New Hope and
The Empire Strikes Back
, Heir to the Jedi chronicles the adventures of Luke as he continues to battle the Empire with his Rebel friends and begins to develop his Force abilities.
The novel is written from the first-person perspective of Luke, and is only the second Star Wars novel to attempt this type of narrative voice.

===
Legends ===
In April 2014, most of the licensed Star Wars novels and comics produced since the originating 1977 film Star Wars were rebranded by Lucasfilm as Star Wars Legends and declared non-canon to the franchise.
The Legends-branded novels, comic books and video games detail
Luke's exploits following Return of the Jedi.

====
Novels ====
In the novel The Truce at Bakura, set one day after the battle of Endor, Luke and his friend Wedge Antilles recover a message droid from the titular planet, which was being invaded by the Ssi-Ruuk.
Luke commands a task force, turning back the enemy army.
He also meets Dev Sibwarra, a Force-sensitive human who had been captured by the Ssi-Ruuk, who is killed in the battle after turning against his captors.
In the novel The Courtship of Princess Leia, set four years after the Battle of Endor, Luke travels to the planet Dathomir.
There, he discovers a group of Force-sensitive witches called the Witches of Dathomir, banded into two separate groups: a collective of benign, matriarchal clans; the one he is in contact with being the Singing Mountain Clan, and the witches who have turned to the dark side, called the Nightsisters.
Discovering a prophecy in which it was told a Jedi would change the way of life on the land, Luke eventually realizes truly what the Force is for the first time in his life.
While there, he destroys most of the Nightsisters (including their powerful leader, Gethzirion, and the galaxy's most powerful remaining warlord, Warlord Zsinj).
Thanks to the help of the prophecy and witches, Luke recovers old Jedi records left by Yoda about 400 years prior.
He decides to start a new Jedi Academy, something he has been trying to do for six months before the start of the novel by finding old Jedi records and archives.
In The Thrawn Trilogy, Luke meets former Emperor's Hand Mara Jade, who is bound by Palpatine's disembodied voice that repeatedly commands "You will kill Luke Skywalker".
Mara Jade is working with her boss, a fringe-of-the-galaxy smuggler named Talon Karrde, who also plays a crucial role in this era.
Although she was ready to fulfill that order to stop the voice, circumstances force her to keep him alive long enough to have him help escape a mutual danger.
Despite her threats, Luke learns of Mara's curse and vows to free her from it.
Meanwhile, the rest of the New Republic is fighting against Grand Admiral Thrawn, and thanks to Leia's help, he is eventually defeated, although Luke tried several times to get near him and his ally, Joruus C'baoth.
Eventually, the desperate pair fights against Luke's clone, Luuke Skywalker, C'baoth's apprentice.
During the fight, Mara Jade destroys the clone and, with Leia's help, destroys C'baoth.
This entire time, C'baoth has been obsessed with "molding" Luke and Mara to serve him, perhaps due to the fact that the Spaarti cloning cylinders he was made from have a reputation of turning people insane later in life.
Nonetheless, C'baoth is defeated along with Luuke, and Mara's sacrifice silences her curse and completes her reconciliation with the Jedi, whom she later joins.
In the Jedi Academy trilogy, Luke resigns his commission in the New Republic's starfighter corps to pursue his Jedi studies and rebuild the Jedi Order in the Massassi Temple on Yavin 4, a decision some anti-Jedi politicians use against him.
Luke becomes the New Jedi Order's leader.
His students in the ways of the Force include; Gantoris, Kam Solusar, Tionne, Streen, Cilghal, Kirana Ti and others.
He is forced to contend with the spirit of ancient Sith Lord Exar Kun, who lures one of his most powerful students, Kyp Durron, to the dark side.

In the Hand of Thrawn Duology, Luke, now a Jedi Master, works again with Mara Jade, who has learned to better her Force knowledge since her training at Luke's Jedi Academy.
He falls in love with her and they eventually marry.
Later, in Edge of Victory: Rebirth, they have a son whom they name Ben, after Obi-Wan Kenobi's pseudonym.

In the New Jedi Order series, Luke creates a New Jedi Council.
He idealises a new conclave, made up of Jedi, politicians and military officers.
Included in this new Jedi Order are Tresina Lobi, Kenth Hammer, Kyle Katarn, Kyp Durron, Cilghal, Saba Sebatynee and himself.
From the politicians and military came new Chief of State Cal Omas, Admiral Sienn Sovv (Sullustan male) and four others.
In Force Heretic: Remnant, he spearheads the mission into the Unknown Regions during the Yuuzhan Vong invasion to find the mysterious planet of Zonama Sekot, a planet that creates living starships.
After the invasion is defeated with the help of the new Mandalorian Warriors, a Sekotian fleet and a Galactic Alliance-Imperial Remnant fleet, Luke leads the New Jedi Order on Denon, the temporary capital of the Galactic Alliance and the site of the newly rebuilt Jedi Temple on Coruscant.
In The Swarm War, the New Jedi Order moves to Ossus, the site of former famous Jedi temples and libraries that were mostly destroyed 4,000 years prior.
Upon the Killik's invasion of Chiss space and the transformation of most of the Myrkr mission survivors into Killik Joiners, Luke determines that the Killik's collective mind is being unconsciously controlled by a hive called the Dark Nest.
The Dark Nest is controlled by a former Nightsister named Lomi Plo, who became their Unseen Queen with her ability to become invisible by exploiting the doubts of inferiors.
One of the Myrkr mission survivors, Alema Rar, attempted to plant seeds of doubt in Luke's mind by suggesting that his wife, Mara, may be somehow responsible for the death of his mother, Padmé Amidala, which he almost believes because of Mara's previous involvement as the Emperor's Hand.
This allows Lomi to escape from Luke.
Luke discovers recordings of his father Force-choking his mother on Mustafar, his own birth, and his mother's death hidden inside the protective memory archives of R2-D2.
Because of this, he is able to overcome his doubts about Mara and defeat Lomi Plo in the final battle of the Swarm War, cutting her into four pieces.
Luke also withdraws the Jedi from Cal Omas' Advisory Council, as he plans to create a New Jedi Council that will give aid to the Galactic Alliance when needed.
He also becomes the Grand Master of the New Jedi Order to give the Jedi a clear sense of direction.
He has told the Jedi to either follow his leadership or make the order their priority, or leave.
Jedi Danni Quee and Tenel Ka have resigned because of their duties to Zonoma Sekot and Hapes, respectively, while Corran Horn tries to resign, but Luke talks him out of it.
Luke is also forced to exile Tahiri, Lowbacca, and Tesar Sebatayne to Dagobah for divulging secret information to people outside the New Jedi Order.

In the Legacy of the Force series, Luke begins having visions of a figure cloaked in darkness destroying the galaxy and the Jedi Decree.
In his dreams, this figure's presence is much like that of Darth Vader.
Luke has been troubled by the fact that he has been unable to discern the identity of this figure.
Complicating matters even more is the recent schism that has developed between Luke and his nephew, Jacen Solo.
Already a tremendously powerful Jedi Knight, Jacen has begun adopting radical and extreme interpretations of the Force, causing a dramatic change in his personality.
Luke fears that Jacen is pursuing the same path that ultimately led to Anakin Skywalker's fall to the dark side.
In Bloodlines, the situation worsens when Luke's son, Ben, becomes Jacen's apprentice.
Luke must also battle his wife, who refuses to confront Jacen for fear of alienating Ben.
In Tempest, Luke determines that the dark figure from his dreams is Lumiya, a former Emperor's Hand now known as the "Dark Lady of the Sith".
Luke and Lumiya had fought several times over the years, but when Mara is murdered in Sacrifice, Lumiya deceives Luke into believing that she killed her.
They battle again, and Luke saves a weaponless Lumiya from falling to her death simply so that he can kill her himself.
Luke returns to Coruscant where he is found by Ben, standing guard over Mara's body; upon speaking with his son, he realizes that Lumiya could not have killed her.
Later in his private cabin, Luke breaks down over the death of his wife, knowing that her murderer is still at large.
He does not realize that the killer is his own nephew, Jacen, who has now taken the Sith name Darth Caedus.
In Revelation, Ben proves that Jacen killed Mara, but Luke is now reluctant to kill Jacen out of fear that he or his son will fall to the dark side in the process.
(
The decision is taken out of his hands in Invincible, when Jaina kills Jacen in a final lightsaber duel).

In Fate of the Jedi novels, set about 40 years after the first film, Luke Skywalker, now in his early sixties, is deposed by the government from his position as Grand Master, and exiled from Coruscant.
However, if he finds the reason of why Jacen Solo fell to the dark side, he can be allowed to return.
Ben insists on coming with him.
Together, father and son explore dangerous and little-known portions of the galaxy.
Luke and Ben learn much about each other, about the Force, and about the great dangers threatening the Jedi.
The great love the two surviving Skywalkers have for each other grows even greater as they repeatedly save each other's lives and explore the limits and powers and mysteries of the Force.

=====
Luke Skywalker and the Shadows of Mindor =====
Luke Skywalker and the Shadows of Mindor is a standalone novel that chronicles the Battle of Mindor, a fictional event in the Star Wars expanded universe.
The novel was written by Matthew Stover and released in December 2008.

The novel is set shortly after Return of the Jedi and the novel Prophets of the Dark Side, with Luke Skywalker and the Rebel Alliance attempting to stop Lord Shadowspawn and his "shadow stormtroopers", culminating in the Battle of Mindor.
Matthew Stover has said on his personal weblog, Luke Skywalker and the Shadows of Mindor is my attempt to get the EU back to its pre-Zahn roots -- specifically, to evoke memories of my all-time favorite Star Wars books, Brian Daley's Han Solo novels.

====
Comic books ====
Luke Skywalker appears in the Marvel-published Star Wars comics adaptations of the original trilogy, as well as an ongoing series that ran from 1977–86.
When Dark Horse acquired the license two years later, he appeared in numerous projects based on the franchise as well.
In Star Wars: Legacy, set 125 years after the events of the original films, Luke appears as a spirit in the Force to his descendant Cade Skywalker and persuades him to once again become a Jedi in order to defeat the evil Darth Krayt and his burgeoning Sith empire.

====
Video games ====
An older and wiser Luke Skywalker also appears in the Jedi Knight II:
Jedi Outcast and Jedi Knight:
Jedi Academy video games at the rank of Jedi Master.
In Jedi Outcast, Luke helps Kyle Katarn in his fight against Desann and Empire Reborn by driving them away from the Valley of the Jedi.
Luke appears in the game
Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed in a downloadable alternate storyline where Starkiller duels Luke.
He also appears in the Disney Lucasfilm video game Star Wars Commander.
Luke is also a playable character in Disney Infinity 3.0.
==
Characterization ==


===
Psychoanalytic ===
Each of the Star Wars characters instantiates one of the archetypes in Joseph Campbell's Hero's journey, with Luke Skywalker symbolizing the Hero archetype.
As such, he is a formulaic, relatable protagonist who encounters the basic struggle between good and evil in the same way as other heroic figures such as Harry Potter, Bilbo Baggins, and Jesus Christ.
Luke's central dilemma is the ongoing war between good and evil, both externally and internally.

===
Religious ===
Some argue that Luke mirrors fundamental values of Christianity and Abrahamic religion; Luke's journey is often compared to that of Jesus Christ.
Scholars argue that Luke is a Christ-like figure, while Yoda represents a god and Darth Vader represents the temptations of evil.
Luke's struggle between good and evil is contrasted with that of his father, Anakin Skywalker, in a way that represents the story of the Prodigal Son.

==
Concept and creation ==
Luke was variously conceived of as a 60-year-old grizzled war hero, later as a Jedi Master, and as a woman.
In an interview about his early drafts, Lucas said:

The first [version] talked about a princess and an old general.
The second version involved a father, his son, and his daughter; the daughter was the heroine of the film.
Now the daughter has become Luke, Mark Hamill's character.
There was also the story of two brothers where I transformed one of them into a sister.
The older brother was imprisoned, and the young sister had to rescue him and bring him back to their dad.

Though Luke's surname was "Skywalker" in Lucas's 1973 treatment of The Star Wars, it was changed to "Starkiller" in subsequent drafts, at one point featuring in the title (The Star Wars:
From the Adventures of Luke Starkiller).
The "Starkiller" surname remained for the first few months of production; Hamill used the name "Luke Starkiller" the sole time he referred to himself during filming (dubbed "Skywalker" in the film).
"
Starkiller" was dropped due to what Lucas called "unpleasant connotations" with Charles Manson.
An alternative ending pitched by George Lucas for Return of the Jedi was Luke assuming his father's role as Darth Vader after the latter's death and intending to rule in his place.
Though Lawrence Kasdan favored the idea, Lucas ultimately declined, since the films were made for children.
Another conclusion to the film featured the character disappearing into the wilderness akin to "Clint Eastwood in the spaghetti westerns.
"According to Mark Hamill
, during the filming of the original Star Wars film, George Lucas asked him if he would reprise the role for a cameo when he was in his 60s to pass the torch to the next generation.
In 1983, Hamill stated that his return to the franchise would be "either be another plane of existence or not the same character".
Hamill learned of the sequel trilogy over the summer of 2012 at a Star Wars Celebration during lunch when Lucas told him one was in development.
Hamill recalled shaving his beard to portray the Trickster in The Flash, then letting it grow back for the filming of Star Wars.
Luke's lack of screen time in The Force Awakens was due to concerns by screenwriter Michael Arndt that his presence would mean the audience would have less interest in protagonist Rey, leading to an agreement that he be removed from the screen and instead become a plot device.
Hamill attended meetings for script readings, and helped conceal Luke's role in the film; instead of dialogue, he read stage directions.
Abrams said it allowed him to remain involved and that his reading helped make a "better experience for everyone".
According to concept designer Christian Alzmann, Luke's appearance in The Last Jedi was partly inspired by that of Colonel Kurtz in Apocalypse Now (1979).

== Reception ==
In 2015, Luke Skywalker was selected by Empire magazine as the 50th-greatest movie character of all time.
Empire also ranked him as the third greatest Star Wars character.
Luke was also on the ballot for the American Film Institute's 100 Years...
100 Heroes and Villains.
On their list of the 100 Greatest Fictional Characters, Fandomania.com ranked Luke at number 14.
IGN listed Luke as their 4th top Star Wars character, and he was chosen twice by IGN's readers as one of their favorite Star Wars characters.
IGN's Jesse Schedeen also picked Luke Skywalker as one of the characters they most wanted to appear on the Wii, as well as listing Skywalker as one of their favorite Star Wars heroes.
Schedeen also listed the character as one of the Star Wars characters they wanted to see in Soulcalibur.
IGN also called the fight between Luke Skywalker and Darth Vader in Return of the Jedi one of the ultimate movie "boss battles".
In a feature on speeches made by Luke Skywalker, IGN's Todd Gilchrist said that his favorite speech made by Luke was "I am a Jedi, like my father before me".
UGO Networks listed Luke as one of their best heroes of all time, and he was voted as one of the coolest Star Wars characters by UGO's readers.
Inventor Dean Kamen has also code-named his new prosthetic arm system "Luke" in honor of the character.
Mark Hamill was nominated a Saturn Award for Best Actor in for his portrayal of Luke Skywalker in Star Wars, and won the award for his portrayal in The Empire Strikes Back, Return of the Jedi, and The Last Jedi.
In 1976, Mark Hamill had a serious car accident after filming Star Wars, which involved an operation on his face.
It was speculated that the Wampa attack at the beginning of The Empire Strikes Back was written in to explain his facial injuries, but George Lucas specifically disputed this in the DVD commentary of The Empire Strikes Back.
In regards to Luke's portrayal in The Last Jedi, many fans expressed disappointment in how he was depicted "as a grumpy old man whose failures had driven him into hiding" and the actions the character takes in contributing to Kylo Ren's backstory, a stark departure in how Luke was characterized in the original trilogy.
Hamill originally stated that he "pretty much fundamentally [disagreed] with every choice [The Last Jedi director Rian Johnson] made for this character," but that he had the utmost respect for Johnson and was willing to do his part to realize Johnson's vision.
While regarding the possibility of a younger actor playing the role, Hamill expressed support towards Sebastian Stan, whose physical resemblance to a young Hamill went viral.
However he noted that child actor Jacob Tremblay would be his top choice if the story were to be focused on a very young Luke.
In 2016, when asked about the character's sexual orientation and if Luke could be gay, Hamill said Luke's sexual orientation "is meant to be interpreted by the viewer."
He added, "if you think Luke is gay, of course he is.
You should not be ashamed of it.
Judge Luke by his character, not by who he loves.
"
Hamill later said that he considered the possibility that Luke could have found love between Episode VI and Episode VII.

==
Cultural impact ==
Skywalker remains an American icon.
In fact, Luke Skywalker is often still used by child psychotherapists to help children to project their thoughts and state of being in a way that is understandable to both the child and their therapist.
Another way that therapists utilize Star Wars in sessions is to teach their patients that the Force represents the self-understanding that they achieve in therapy.
Children are taught that they are Luke and their therapist
is Obi-Wan as eventually, as Luke no longer needed his mentor, patients will one day no longer need their therapist.
Star Wars has been related back to cultural events of its time, such as the Cold War and Nixon-era politics.
The severing of Luke's hand and Darth Vader's bionic presence supposedly, according to space.com, symbolize the unity of the military and amputees.

==
Relationships ==


===
Family tree ===


===
Mentorship tree ===


==
References ==
Footnotes
Citations


==
Further reading ==
Dunk, Steve (December 28, 2017). "
A Hero's Journey - Luke Skywalker".
TheForce.net.
Retrieved October 6, 2019.

==
External links ==
Luke Skywalker in the StarWars.com Databank
Luke Skywalker on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Luke Skywalker on IMDb
Luke Skywalker and the Shadows of Mindor on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Darth Vader is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise.
The character is a primary antagonist in the original trilogy and a primary protagonist in the prequel trilogy.
Star Wars creator George Lucas has collectively referred to the first six episodic films of the franchise as "the tragedy of Darth Vader".
Originally a slave on Tatooine, Anakin Skywalker is a Jedi prophesied to bring balance to the Force.
He is lured to the dark side of the Force by Palpatine and becomes a Sith lord.
After a lightsaber battle with his former mentor Obi-Wan Kenobi, in which he is severely injured, Vader is transformed into a cyborg.
He then serves the Galactic Empire as its chief enforcer until he ultimately redeems himself by saving his son, Luke Skywalker, and killing Palpatine, sacrificing his own life in the process.
He is also the secret husband of Padmé Amidala, father of Princess Leia, and grandfather of Kylo Ren.

The character has been portrayed by numerous actors: David Prowse physically portrayed Vader while James Earl Jones voiced him in the original trilogy, and Sebastian Shaw portrayed the unmasked Anakin in Return of the Jedi, as well as the character's spirit in the original release of that film.
Jake Lloyd and Hayden Christensen played the character in the prequel trilogy in the first and next two films, respectively, and the latter also replaced Shaw as Anakin's spirit with the 2004 re-release of Return of the Jedi.
His cinematic appearances span the first six Star Wars films, as well as Rogue One.
He is referenced in both The Force Awakens and The Last Jedi, and makes vocal cameos as both Vader and Anakin in The Rise of Skywalker.
He also appears in television series (most substantially The Clone Wars) and numerous iterations of the Star Wars Expanded Universe, including video games, novels, and comic books.

Darth Vader has become one of the most iconic villains in popular culture, and has been listed among the greatest villains and fictional characters ever.
The American Film Institute listed him as the third greatest movie villain in cinema history on 100 Years...
100 Heroes and Villains, behind Hannibal Lecter and Norman Bates.
His role as a tragic hero in the saga was also met with positive reviews.

== Creation and development ==


===
Name ===
Various combinations of names for the character were built upon the phrase "Dark Water".
Then Lucas "added lots of last names, Vaders and Wilsons and Smiths, and [he] just came up with the combination of Darth and Vader.
"
After the release of The Empire Strikes Back (1980), Lucas said the name Vader was based upon the German/Dutch-language homophone vater or vader, meaning 'father', making the name representative of a "Dark Father".
Other words which may have inspired the name are "death" and "invader", as well as the name of a high school upperclassman of Lucas's, Gary Vader.
As no other character with the title "Darth" was introduced until the release of The Phantom Menace (1999), some viewers interpreted it as the character's first name, in part because Obi-Wan Kenobi addresses him as "Darth" in the original film.
The moniker is bestowed upon Anakin in Revenge of the Sith (2005) upon his turn to the dark side of the Force.

Director Ken Annakin's films Swiss Family Robinson and Battle of the Bulge influenced the original trilogy, leading some to believe that Anakin was named after him.
Lucas's publicist denied this following Annakin's death in 2009.
Anakin and Luke's original surname "Starkiller" remained in the script until a few months into filming Star Wars, when it was dropped due to what Lucas called "unpleasant connotations" with Charles Manson and replaced with "Skywalker".
===
Concept and writing ===
In the first draft of The Star Wars, tall, grim general "Darth Vader" was already close in line with his final depiction, and the protagonist Annikin Starkiller had a role similar to that of his son Luke's as the 16-year-old son of a respected warrior.
Originally, Lucas conceived of the Sith as a group that served the Emperor in the same way that the Schutzstaffel served Adolf Hitler.
In developing the backstory for The Empire Strikes
Back, Lucas condensed this into one character in the form of Darth Vader.
After the success of the original Star Wars (1977), Lucas hired science-fiction author Leigh Brackett to write the sequel with him.
They held story conferences and, by late November 1977, Lucas had produced a handwritten treatment.
In the first draft that Brackett would write from this, Luke's father appears as a ghost to instruct Luke.
Lucas was disappointed with the script, but Brackett died of cancer before he could discuss it with her.
With no writer available, Lucas wrote the next draft himself.
In this draft, dated April 1, 1978, he made use of a new plot twist: Vader claiming to be Luke's father.
According to Lucas, he found this draft enjoyable to write, as opposed to the year-long struggles writing the first film.
Lucas has said that he knew Vader was Luke's father while writing the first film, though the relationship is not evidenced before said draft of The Empire Strikes Back.
The new plot element of Luke's parentage had drastic effects on the series.
Author Michael Kaminski argues in The Secret History of Star Wars that it is unlikely that the plot point had ever seriously been considered or even conceived of before 1978, and that the first film was clearly operating under a storyline where Vader was a separate character from Luke's father.
After writing the second and third drafts in which the plot point was introduced, Lucas reviewed the new backstory he had created: Anakin had been Obi-Wan Kenobi's brilliant student and had a child named Luke, but was swayed to the dark side by Palpatine.
Anakin battled Obi-Wan on the site of a volcano and was badly wounded, but was then reborn as Vader.
Meanwhile, Obi-Wan hid Luke on Tatooine while the Galactic Republic became the tyrannical Galactic Empire and Vader systematically hunted down and killed the Jedi.
This change in character would provide a springboard to the "tragedy of Darth Vader" storyline that underlies the prequel trilogy.

After deciding to create the prequel trilogy, Lucas indicated that the story arc would be a tragic one depicting Anakin's fall to the dark side.
He also saw that the prequels could form the beginning of one long story that started with Anakin's childhood and ended with his death.
This was the final step towards turning the film series into a "saga".
For the first prequel, Episode I: The Phantom Menace (1999), Lucas made Anakin nine years old to make the character's separation from his mother more poignant.
Movie trailers focused on Anakin and a one-sheet poster showing him casting Vader's shadow informed otherwise unknowing audiences of the character's eventual fate.
The movie ultimately achieved a primary goal of introducing audiences to Anakin, as well as introducing the concept that he is the Chosen One of an ancient Jedi prophecy, destined to bring balance to the Force.
Lucas states in an interview recorded around the time of the third prequel, Revenge of the Sith (2005), that "Anakin is the Chosen One.
Even when Anakin turns into Darth Vader, he is still the Chosen One.
"Michael
Kaminski offers evidence that issues in Anakin's fall to the dark side prompted Lucas to make fundamental story changes, first revising the opening sequence of Revenge of the Sith to have Palpatine kidnapped and his apprentice, Count Dooku, killed by Anakin in cold blood as the first act in the latter's turn towards the dark side.
After principal photography was complete in 2003, Lucas re-wrote Anakin's turn to the dark side; Anakin's fall from grace would now be motivated by a desire to save his wife, Padmé Amidala, rather than the previous version in which that reason was one of several, including that he genuinely believed that the Jedi were plotting to take over the Republic.
This fundamental re-write was accomplished both through editing the principal footage, and new and revised scenes filmed during pick-ups in 2004.During production of the animated The Clone Wars television series, Ahsoka Tano was developed to illustrate how Anakin develops from the brash, undisciplined Padawan apprentice in Attack of the Clones (2002) to the more reserved Jedi Knight in Revenge of the Sith.
Clone Wars supervising director and Rebels co-creator
Dave Filoni said that giving Anakin responsibility for a Padawan was meant to place the character in a role that forced him to become more cautious and responsible.
It would also give him insight into his relationship with Obi-Wan and depict how their relationship matured.
Ahsoka and Anakin's relationship was seen as an essential story arc spanning both the animated film and Clone Wars television series.
Filoni began thinking about the final confrontation between Ahsoka and Vader ever since he created the former; different iterations had different endings, including one in which Vader kills Ahsoka just as she slashes open his helmet to reveal his scarred face.
A similar scene is included in an episode of Rebels, in which Ahsoka slashes Vader's helmet open, and the Sith lord recognizes her.
According to Filoni, Ahsoka's presence in the series allows Vader to encounter the show's lead characters without the latter being "destroyed", as Ahsoka can "stand toe-to-toe" with her former master.

===
Design ===
The original design of Darth Vader's costume did not originally include a helmet.
The idea that Vader should wear a breathing apparatus was first proposed by concept artist Ralph McQuarrie during preproduction discussions for Star Wars with George Lucas in 1975.
McQuarrie stated that Lucas's artistic direction was to portray a malevolent figure in a cape with samurai armor. "
For Darth Vader, George just said he would like to have a very tall, dark fluttering figure that had a spooky feeling like it came in on the wind."
McQuarrie noted that the script indicated that Vader would travel between spaceships and needed to survive in the vacuum of space, and he proposed that Vader should wear some sort of space suit.
Lucas agreed, and McQuarrie combined a full-face breathing mask with a samurai helmet, thus creating one of the most iconic designs of space fantasy cinema.
McQuarrie's 1975 production painting of Darth Vader engaged in a lightsaber duel with Deak Starkiller (a character prototype for Luke Skywalker) depicts Vader wearing black armor, a flowing cape and an elongated, skull-like mask and helmet.
Its similarity to the final design of Vader's costume demonstrates that McQuarrie's earliest conception of Vader was so successful that very little needed to be changed for production.

Working from McQuarrie's designs, the costume designer John Mollo devised a costume that could be worn by an actor on-screen using a combination of clerical robes, a motorcycle suit, a German military helmet and a military gas mask.
The prop sculptor Brian Muir created the helmet and armour used in the film.
The sound of the respirator function of Vader's mask was created by Ben Burtt using modified recordings of scuba breathing apparatus used by divers.
The sound effect is trademarked in the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office under Trademark #77419252 and is officially described in the documentation as "The sound of rhythmic mechanical human breathing created by breathing through a scuba tank regulator.
"Commentators have often pointed to the influence of Akira Kurosawa's films such as The Hidden Fortress (1958) on George Lucas, and Vader's samurai-inspired costume design is held up as a significant example of the Japanese influences on Star Wars.

===
Portrayals ===
Darth Vader was portrayed by bodybuilder David Prowse in the original film trilogy, with fencer Bob Anderson performing the character's lightsaber fight scenes.
At 6 ft 6 in (1.98 m) tall, George Lucas thought Prowse "brought a physicality to Darth Vader that was essential for the character ... with an imposing stature and movement performance to match the intensity and undercurrent of Vader’s presence.
"Lucas chose to have a different actor be the voice of Vader, since Prowse had a strong West Country English accent that led the rest of the cast to nickname him "Darth Farmer".
Lucas originally intended for Orson Welles to voice Vader, but after deciding that Welles's voice would be too recognizable, he cast the lesser-known James Earl Jones instead.
Jones initially felt his contributions to the films were too small to warrant recognition and his role was uncredited at his request until the release of Return of the Jedi (1983).
When Jones was specifically asked if he had supplied Vader's voice for Revenge of the Sith—either newly or from a previous recording—Jones answered, "You'd have to ask Lucas about that.
I don't know."
Hayden Christensen and Gene Bryant alternately portray Vader in Revenge of the Sith.
During the production of Revenge of the Sith, Christensen asked Lucas if a special Vader suit could be constructed to fit his own body, rather than have a different actor don one of the original sets of Vader armor worn by Prowse.
Brock Peters provided the voice of Darth Vader in the NPR/USC radio series.
Both Spencer Wilding and Daniel Naprous portrayed Vader in Rogue One (2016), with Jones reprising his role as the character's voice.
Vader's character has also been portrayed in several video games; in games such as Rebel Assault II: The Hidden Empire and Dark Forces, visual effects artist C. Andrew Nelson appears in short sequences in the Vader costume, voiced by Scott Lawrence.
Matt Sloan, who appeared in the YouTube parody Chad Vader, provided the voice of Darth Vader in The Force Unleashed.
As a result of his video game appearances, Nelson was cast to appear as Vader in brief sequences inserted into the Special Edition of The Empire Strikes Back, in which Vader is seen boarding his shuttle.
During production of Return of the Jedi, the casting crew sought an experienced actor for the role of Anakin Skywalker since his death was unquestionably the emotional climax of the film, and Sebastian Shaw was selected for the role.
When Shaw arrived at the set for filming, he ran into his friend Ian McDiarmid, the actor playing the Emperor.
When McDiarmid asked him what he was doing there, Shaw responded, "I don't know,
dear boy, I think it's something to do with science-fiction.
"
His presence during the filming was kept secret from all but the minimum cast and crew, and Shaw was contractually obliged not to discuss any film secrets with anyone, even his family.
The unmasking scene, directed by Richard Marquand, was filmed in one day and required only a few takes, with no alteration from the original dialogue.
Lucas personally directed Shaw for his appearance in the final scene of the film, in which he is a Force Ghost of Anakin.
Shaw's image in this scene was replaced with that of Christensen in the 2004 DVD release.
This last attempt to tie the prequel and original trilogies together proved to be possibly the most controversial change in the Star Wars re-releases.
Shaw received more fan mail and autograph requests from Return of the Jedi than he had for any role in the rest of his career.
He later reflected that he enjoyed his experience filming Return of the Jedi and expressed particular surprise that an action figure was made of him from the film.

When The Phantom Menace was being produced, hundreds of actors were tested for the role of young Anakin before the producers settled on Jake Lloyd, who Lucas considered met his requirements of "a good actor, enthusiastic and very energetic".
Producer Rick McCallum said that Lloyd was "smart, mischievous and loves anything mechanical—just like Anakin."
During production of Attack of the Clones, casting director Robin Gurland reviewed about 1,500 other candidates for the role of the young Anakin before Lucas eventually selected Hayden Christensen for the role.
When Revenge of the Sith was being produced, Christensen and Ewan McGregor began rehearsing their climactic lightsaber duel long before Lucas would shoot it.
They trained extensively with stunt coordinator Nick Gillard to memorize and perform their duel together.
As in the previous prequel film, McGregor and Christensen performed their own lightsaber fighting scenes without the use of stunt doubles.
Anakin has also been voiced by Mat Lucas for the 2003 micro-series Clone Wars, and by Matt Lanter in the CGI animated film The Clone Wars, the television series of the same name and for Anakin's small roles in the animated series Rebels and Forces of Destiny.
James Earl Jones reprised the voice role for Vader's appearances in Rebels.
Both Lanter and Jones contributed their voices for the second-season finale of Rebels, at times with identical dialogue spoken by both actors blended together in different ways.

===
Characteristics ===
In Attack of the Clones, Anakin Skywalker feels "smothered" by Obi-Wan Kenobi and is incapable of controlling his own life.
By Revenge of the Sith, however, his "father-son" friction with his master has matured into a more equal, brotherly relationship.
Once he becomes Darth Vader, each evil act he commits shatters any hope or connection towards his previous life, which makes it harder for him to return to the light, but he ultimately escapes the dark side and redeems himself by sacrificing his life to save his son, Luke Skywalker, and kill the Emperor in Return of the Jedi.
Eric Bui, a psychiatrist at University of Toulouse Hospital, argued at the 2007 American Psychiatric Association convention that Anakin Skywalker meets six of the nine diagnostic criteria for borderline personality disorder (BPD), one more than necessary for a diagnosis.
He and a colleague, Rachel Rodgers, published their findings in a 2010 letter to the editor of the journal Psychiatry Research.
Bui says he found Anakin Skywalker a useful example to explain BPD to medical students.
In particular, Bui points to Anakin's abandonment issues and uncertainty over his identity.
Anakin's mass murders of the Tusken Raiders in Attack of the Clones and the young Jedi in Revenge of the Sith count as two dissociative episodes, fulfilling another criterion.
Bui hoped his paper would help raise awareness of the disorder, especially among teens.

==
Appearances ==
Darth Vader/Anakin Skywalker appears in seven of the live-action Star Wars films, the animated series The Clone Wars (including the film), Rebels, and the micro-series Clone Wars and Forces of Destiny.
He also has a main and recurring role in games, comics, books and the non-canon Star Wars Legends material.

===
Skywalker saga ===


====
Original trilogy ====
Darth Vader first appears in Star Wars as a ruthless cyborg Sith Lord serving the Galactic Empire.
He is tasked, along with Grand Moff Tarkin (Peter Cushing), with recovering the secret plans for the Death Star superweapon, which were stolen by the Rebel Alliance.
Vader captures and tortures Princess Leia (Carrie Fisher), who has hidden the plans inside the droid R2-D2 (Kenny Baker) and sent it to find Vader's former Jedi Master Obi-Wan Kenobi (Alec Guinness) on the planet Tatooine.
During Leia's rescue by Obi-Wan's allies Luke Skywalker (Mark Hamill) and Han Solo
(Harrison Ford), Vader strikes down Obi-Wan in a lightsaber duel.
Having placed a tracking device aboard their ship, the Millennium Falcon, Vader is able to track down the Rebel base on the planet Yavin 4.
During the Rebel attack on the Death Star, Vader boards his TIE fighter and attempts to shoot down Rebel X-wing fighters, but Solo intervenes and sends Vader's ship spiraling off course, allowing Luke to destroy the Death Star.

In The Empire Strikes Back, Vader becomes obsessed with finding the Force-sensitive Luke and leads his stormtroopers to attack on the Rebel base on Hoth, which the Rebels escape.
While conversing with the Emperor (Ian McDiarmid) via hologram, Vader convinces him that Luke would be a valuable ally if he could be turned to the dark side.
Vader hires a group of bounty hunters to follow Luke's friends, and negotiates with Bespin administrator Lando Calrissian (Billy Dee Williams) to set a trap for them to bait Luke.
After Han, Leia, Chewbacca (Peter Mayhew), and C-3PO (Anthony Daniels) arrive, Vader tortures and freezes Han in carbonite and gives him to the bounty hunter Boba Fett (Jeremy Bulloch).
When Luke arrives, Vader overpowers him in a lightsaber duel, severing his hand.
Vader tells Luke that he is his father, and tries to persuade him to join the dark side and help him overthrow the Emperor.
Horrified, Luke escapes through an air shaft.
Vader telepathically tells Luke that it is his destiny to join the dark side.

In Return of the Jedi, Vader and the Emperor supervise the final stages of the second Death Star's construction.
Thinking that there is still good in his father, Luke surrenders to Vader and tries to convince him to turn from the dark side.
Vader takes Luke to the second Death Star to meet the Emperor.
While there, the Emperor tempts Luke to give in to his anger, which leads to Vader dueling with Luke once again.
Realizing that Leia is Luke's twin sister, Vader threatens to turn her to the dark side if Luke will not submit.
Furious, Luke overpowers Vader and severs his father's cybernetic hand.
The Emperor entreats Luke to kill Vader and take his place.
Luke refuses and the Emperor tortures him with Force lightning.
Unwilling to let his son die, Vader throws the Emperor down a reactor chute to his death, but is mortally wounded by his former master's lightning in the process.
The redeemed Anakin Skywalker asks Luke to remove his mask, and admits that there was still good in him after all as he dies peacefully in his son's arms.
Luke escapes the second Death Star with his father's body and cremates it in a pyre on Endor.
As the Rebels celebrate the Death Star's destruction and the Empire's defeat, Luke sees the spirits of Anakin, Yoda (Frank Oz), and Obi-Wan watching over him.

====
Prequel
trilogy ====
In Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace, which takes place 32 years before A New Hope
, Anakin appears as a nine-year-old slave living on Tatooine with his mother Shmi (Pernilla August).
In addition to being a gifted pilot and mechanic, Anakin has built his own protocol droid, C-3PO.
Jedi Master Qui-Gon Jinn (Liam Neeson) meets Anakin after making an emergency landing on Tatooine with Queen of Naboo Padmé Amidala (Natalie Portman).
Qui-Gon learns from Shmi that Anakin was conceived without a father and can foresee the future.
Qui-Gon senses Anakin's strong connection to the Force and becomes convinced that he is the "Chosen One" of Jedi prophecy who will bring balance to the Force.
After winning his freedom in a podrace wager, Anakin leaves with Qui-Gon to be trained as a Jedi on Coruscant, but is forced to leave his mother behind.
During the journey, Anakin forms a bond with Padmé.
Qui-Gon asks the Jedi Council for permission to train Anakin, but they sense fear in the boy and refuse.
Eventually, Anakin helps end the corrupt Trade Federation's invasion of Naboo by destroying their control ship.
After Qui-Gon is killed in a lightsaber duel with Sith Lord Darth Maul (portrayed by Ray Park, voiced by Peter Serafinowicz), Qui-Gon's apprentice Obi-Wan Kenobi (Ewan McGregor) promises to train Anakin, with the council's reluctant approval.
Palpatine, newly elected as the Galactic Republic's Chancellor, befriends Anakin and tells him, "We will watch your career with great interest".

In Episode II: Attack of the Clones, which takes place 10 years after The Phantom Menace, 19-year-old Anakin is still Obi-Wan's Padawan apprentice.
Over the years, he has grown powerful but arrogant, and believes that Obi-Wan is holding him back.
After rescuing Padmé from an assassination attempt, Anakin travels with her to Naboo as her bodyguard, and they fall in love, which is against the Jedi Code.
Sensing that Shmi is in pain, Anakin travels with Padmé to Tatooine to rescue his mother.
While there, Anakin learns that Shmi had been freed by and
married farmer Cliegg Lars (Jack Thompson)
a few years after he left.
He then visits Cliegg and learns from him that she was kidnapped by Tusken Raiders.
Anakin locates Shmi at a Tusken campsite, where she dies in his arms.
Anakin, enraged, massacres the Tusken tribe and returns to the Lars homestead to bury Shmi.
Anakin then travels with Padmé to Geonosis to rescue Obi-Wan from Sith Lord Count Dooku (Christopher Lee).
Dooku captures the trio and sentences them to death.
However, a battalion of Jedi arrives with an army of clone troopers to halt the executions.
Obi-Wan and Anakin confront Dooku, but the Sith Lord beats them both in a lightsaber duel and severs Anakin's arm.
After being rescued by Yoda, Anakin is fitted with a robotic arm and marries Padmé in a secret ceremony.

In Episode III: Revenge of the Sith, set three years after Attack of the Clones, Anakin is now a Jedi Knight and a hero of the Clone Wars.
He and Obi-Wan lead a mission to rescue Palpatine from Separatist commander General Grievous (voiced by Matthew Wood).
The two Jedi battle Count Dooku, whom Anakin overpowers and decapitates in cold blood at Palpatine's urging.
They rescue Palpatine and return to Coruscant.
Anakin reunites with Padmé, who tells him that she is pregnant.
Although initially excited, Anakin soon begins to have nightmares about Padmé dying in childbirth.
Palpatine also appoints Anakin to the Jedi Council as his personal representative.
Suspicious of Palpatine, the Council allows Anakin as a member, but declines to grant him the rank of Jedi Master and instead instructs him to spy on Palpatine, diminishing Anakin's trust in the Jedi.
Later, Palpatine reveals to Anakin that he is the Sith Lord Darth Sidious, and says that only he has the power to save Padmé from dying.
Anakin reports Sidious' treachery to Jedi Master Mace Windu (Samuel L. Jackson), who confronts and subdues Sidious.
Desperate to save Padmé, Anakin intervenes on Sidious' behalf and disarms Windu, allowing Sidious to kill him.

Anakin then pledges himself to the Sith, and Sidious dubs him Darth Vader.
On Sidious' orders, Vader leads the 501st Legion to kill everyone in the Jedi Temple, including the children, and then goes to the volcanic planet Mustafar to assassinate the Separatist Council.
A distraught Padmé goes to Mustafar and implores Vader to abandon the dark side, but he refuses.
Sensing Obi-Wan's presence, and thinking that they are conspiring to kill him, Vader angrily uses the Force to strangle Padmé to unconsciousness.
Obi-Wan engages Vader in a lightsaber duel that ends with Obi-Wan severing Vader's limbs and leaving him for dead on the banks of a lava flow, severely burned.
Sidious finds a barely alive Vader and takes him to Coruscant, where his mutilated body is treated and covered in the black suit first depicted in the original trilogy.
When Vader asks if Padmé is safe, Sidious says that he killed her out of anger, and Vader screams in agony.
At the end of the film, Vader supervises the construction of the first Death Star alongside Sidious and Tarkin (Wayne Pygram).

====
Sequel
trilogy ====
Darth Vader's melted helmet appears in The Force Awakens (2015), in which Vader's grandson Kylo Ren (Adam Driver) is seen addressing him, though Vader does not appear in the film.
At one point, his helmet was considered as the film's MacGuffin.
The helmet appears again in The Rise of Skywalker (2019), when Kylo briefly meditates with it, and during the film's first duel between Kylo and Rey (Daisy Ridley), during which it is last seen on Kijimi, which is later destroyed by a Sith Star Destroyer.
The film also reveals that the voice which Ren perceived coming from Vader's helmet in The Force Awakens was generated by Darth Sidious.

In The Rise of Skywalker, Anakin makes a vocal cameo, along with other "voices of Jedi Past", where he encourages Rey to "bring back the balance... as [he] did" before she faces a resurrected Sidious.

===
Other Star Wars films ===


====
The Clone Wars (film) ====
In the 2008 3D animated film The Clone Wars, Yoda (voiced by Tom Kane) assigns Ahsoka Tano (voiced by Ashley Eckstein) as Anakin's Padawan apprentice, a responsibility Anakin is at first reluctant to accept.
Anakin calls her "Snips" for her "snippy" attitude, while Ahsoka calls him "Skyguy" as a pun on his surname.
After earning Anakin's respect during a dangerous mission, Ahsoka joins him on a quest to rescue Jabba the Hutt's infant son, Rotta.
Her impetuousness both annoys and endears her to her master, and Anakin develops a friendly affection for his apprentice.

====
Rogue One ====
In the first anthology film Rogue One (2016), Darth Vader makes a cameo appearance in which he summons Orson Krennic (Ben Mendelsohn), the Imperial Director of Advanced Weapons Research, to his castle on Mustafar.
He confronts him about his handling of the Death Star project and the destruction of Jedha City, while Krennic asks Vader for an audience with the Emperor regarding the Death Star, which he lost command of to Tarkin.
Vader refuses, ordering him to ensure that the Death Star project has not been compromised.
When Krennic asks him if he would still regain command of the Death Star, Vader uses the Force to choke him, telling him, "Be careful not to choke on your aspirations, Director.
"
At the end of the film, Vader boards the disabled Rebel flagship, the MC75 Star Cruiser Profundity, with a cadre of 501st
Legion troopers and kills several Rebel soldiers as he attempts to recover the plans.
However, the docked blockade runner Tantive IV escapes with the plans, setting up the events of A New Hope.

Darth Vader had a much different role in early versions of the film's story.
Screenwriter Gary Whitta stated that in his initial pitch, Vader would appear on Scarif and slaughter the Rebel blockade there.
In an earlier storyline, Vader would also have killed Krennic for his failure to prevent the Rebels from stealing the Death Star plans.
An image of a deleted scene featuring Vader was revealed in February 2021 by Industrial Light & Magic visual effects animator Hal Hickel, who added that Vader was supposed to have a conversation with Tarkin in that scene.

===
Television series ===


====
Clone Wars (2003–2005) ====
Anakin is a lead character in all three seasons of the Clone Wars micro-series, which takes place shortly after the conclusion of Attack of the Clones.
Anakin becomes a Jedi Knight and is quickly promoted to a General of the Republic's Clone Army, due in part to Palpatine's (voiced by Nick Jameson) influence.
Among other missions, he fights a duel with Dooku's apprentice Asajj Ventress (voiced by Grey DeLisle), helps Obi-Wan (voiced by James Arnold Taylor) capture a Separatist-controlled fortress and rescues Jedi Master Saesee Tiin (voiced by Dee Bradley Baker) during a space battle.
During the third season, Anakin frees a planet's indigenous species from Separatist control and sees a cryptic vision of his future as Darth Vader.
In the series finale, Anakin and Obi-Wan go on a mission to rescue Palpatine from General Grievous, leading to the opening of Revenge of the Sith.

====
The Clone Wars (2008–2014, 2020) ====
Anakin is a lead character in all seasons of The Clone Wars.
As a Jedi Knight, he leads the 501st Legion on missions with both his master Obi-Wan and apprentice Ahsoka Tano throughout the war.
Some of Anakin's actions taken out of concern for Ahsoka violate the Jedi code, such as torturing prisoners who may know her location when she goes missing.
Throughout the series there are several references to Anakin's eventual fall to the dark side, including visions of his future as Darth Vader in the third season, and disillusion with the Jedi Council after they wrongly accuse Ahsoka of bombing the Jedi Temple in the fifth season.
While she is later forgiven after the true culprit is found, she nonetheless chooses to leave the Jedi Order.
Anakin appears as Vader in the final scene of the series finale, some time after Revenge of the Sith.
He investigates the crash site of Ahsoka's Star Destroyer, which collapsed during her battle with her clone troopers after Darth Sidious issued Order 66, turning the clones against the Jedi.
Finding her lightsaber among the wreckage, Vader assumes that his former Padawan has perished and leaves with the lightsaber.

====
Rebels (2014–2018) ====
Darth Vader appears in two episodes of the first season of Star Wars Rebels, which takes place 14 years after The Clone Wars concludes, and serves as the main antagonist of its second season.
Vader leads a squadron of Force-sensitive Imperial Inquisitors who actively search for and kill any remaining Jedi and Force-sensitive children.
In the second-season premiere, Vader orchestrates the murder of Minister Maketh Tua, an Imperial who tried to defect to the rebellion, and confronts the rebel crew of the Ghost.
When he later attacks the fleet of the Phoenix Squadron, Vader discovers that Ahsoka is still alive and has joined the Rebel Alliance, while Ahsoka is overwhelmed when she recognizes Anakin under "a layer of hate" in Darth Vader.
The Emperor orders Vader to dispatch an Inquisitor to capture her.
Later in the season, Ahsoka has a vision in which Anakin blames her for allowing him to fall to the dark side.
In the season finale, Ahsoka duels with her former master inside a Sith Temple, allowing her friends to escape Vader and the temple's destruction.
As the episode concludes, Vader escapes from the temple's ruins.
Vader makes a final voiceless cameo in the late fourth-season episode "A World Between Worlds", in which it is revealed that Ahsoka escaped from her previous duel with Vader by entering a Force-realm.
Shortly afterward, Vader's voice is heard echoing in the void.

====
Forces of Destiny (2017–2018) ====
Anakin Skywalker appears in multiple episodes of the 2D animated online micro-series Star Wars Forces of Destiny.

====
Obi-Wan Kenobi ====
On December 10, 2020, during a Disney Investor event, it was announced that Hayden Christensen would return as Vader in the upcoming Disney+
streaming series Obi-Wan Kenobi.

===
Canon literature ===
In the first chapter of the novelization of The Phantom Menace, Anakin participates in a podrace through Beggar's Canyon on Tatooine.
This parallels his future son Luke's flights through the same canyon as mentioned in A New Hope.
Star Wars:
Lords of the Sith was one of the first four canon novels to be released in 2014 and 2015.
In it, Vader and Palpatine find themselves hunted by revolutionaries on the Twi'lek planet Ryloth.

====
Comics ====
In 2015, Marvel released a 25-issue series called Darth Vader (2015–16), written by Kieron Gillen.
It focuses on the Sith lord in the aftermath of the Death Star's destruction, as well as his life after learning about his son's existence, and introduces franchise fan favorite character Doctor Aphra.
This series takes place parallel to the comic book series Star Wars, in which Vader and Luke meet; the two series have a crossover titled Vader Down.
A continuation set between The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi debuted in 2020, written by Greg Pak.
The first few issues deal with Vader carrying out his revenge on those who concealed Luke; he also visits Padmé's tomb on Naboo and encounters her handmaidens.
The five-issue limited series Obi-Wan & Anakin (2016), written by Charles Soule, depicts the lives of the titular Jedi between The Phantom Menace and Attack of the Clones.
At New York Comic Con 2015, Soule described the story as "pretty unexplored territory".
Between 2017 and 2018, Soule wrote a prequel-era series, also called Darth Vader (sometimes subtitled Dark Lord of the Sith).
It begins immediately after Vader wakes up in his armor at the end of Revenge of the Sith and explores his emotional transformation upon learning of Padmé's death, his adjustment to his mechanical suit, how he creates his red-bladed lightsaber, and his hunting of Jedi in the Inquisitor program (introduced in Rebels).
Its final arc, which deals with the construction of Vader's fortress on Mustafar, implies that Palpatine used the Force to conceive Anakin in utero, as some had theorized that Revenge of the Sith indicates.
A Lucasfilm story group member later clarified that "This is all in Anakin's head".
A five-issue limited series written by Dennis Hopeless, Vader: Dark Visions, was released in 2019.
According to Marvel, the series "sheds new light on the many sides of the galaxy's greatest villain".
===
Virtual reality game ===
In the 2015 Star Wars Celebration, it was announced David S. Goyer was helping to develop a virtual reality game series based on Darth Vader.
As an observer with limited influence, the player is able to walk, pick up, push and open things, and possibly affect the story.
The game, titled Vader Immortal, had three episodes overall, set between Revenge of the Sith and Rogue One; the first became available with the launch of Oculus Quest, while the last episode was released on November 21, 2019.
The game was later ported to the Oculus Rift.
On August 25, 2020, all three episodes were also released on PlayStation VR.

===
Legends ===
In April 2014, most of the licensed Star Wars novels and comics produced since the originating 1977 film Star Wars were rebranded by Lucasfilm as Legends and declared non-canon to the franchise.

====
Books ====
Vader is featured prominently in novels set in the Star Wars universe.
In the 1978 novel Splinter of the Mind's Eye by Alan Dean Foster, Vader meets Luke Skywalker for the first time and engages him in a lightsaber duel that ends with Luke cutting off Vader's arm and Vader falling into a deep pit.
Shadows of the Empire (1996) reveals that Vader is conflicted about trying to turn his son to the dark side of the Force, and knows deep down that there is still some good in himself.

Vader's supposedly indestructible glove is the MacGuffin of the young-reader's book The Glove of Darth Vader (1992).
Anakin Skywalker's redeemed spirit appears in The Truce at Bakura (1993), set a few days after the end of Return of the Jedi.
He appears to Leia, imploring her forgiveness.
Leia condemns Anakin for his crimes and exiles him from her life.
He promises that he will be there for her when she needs him, and disappears.
In Tatooine Ghost (2003), Leia learns to forgive her father after learning about his childhood as a slave and his mother's traumatic death.
In The Unifying Force (2003), Anakin tells his grandson Jacen Solo to "stand firm" in his battle with the Supreme Overlord of the Yuuzhan Vong.

Upon the release of the prequel films, the Expanded Universe grew to include novels about Vader's former life as Anakin Skywalker.
Greg Bear's 2000 novel Rogue Planet and Jude Watson's Jedi Quest series chronicle Anakin's early missions with Obi-Wan, while James Luceno's 2005 novel Labyrinth of Evil, set during the Clone Wars, depicts Anakin battling Separatist commander General Grievous.
In Luceno's Dark Lord: The Rise of Darth Vader (2005), set a few months after the events of Revenge of the Sith, Vader disavows his identity as Skywalker as he systematically pursues and kills the surviving Jedi and cements his position in the Empire.
The novel reveals that Vader plans to eventually overthrow Palpatine and that he betrayed the Jedi because he resented their supposed failure to recognize his power.

In the Dark Nest trilogy (2005), Luke and Leia uncover old recordings of their parents in R2-D2's memory drive; for the first time, they see their own birth and their mother's death, as well as their father's corruption to the dark side.
In Bloodlines (2006), Han and Leia's son Jacen—who has turned to the dark side—uses the Force to envision Vader slaughtering the children at the Jedi Temple.

Vader also appears in a series of tongue-in-cheek children's books by Jeffrey Brown.
In Brown's series, a hapless Vader sets out to be a father to a young Luke and Leia, with some scenes portraying light-hearted versions of their darker film counterparts.
For example, one scene shows Vader, Luke and Leia at the carbonite freezing chamber on Bespin, with Vader pronouncing the freezer adequate for making ice cream.

====
Comics ====
Vader appears in several comic books such as Marvel Comics' Star Wars (1977–1986).
Anakin Skywalker is a major character in Dark Horse Comics' Star Wars: Republic series (1998–2006).
In Boba Fett: Enemy of the Empire (1999), Vader hires Fett a few years before the events of A New Hope.
In Vader's Quest (1999), set soon after A New Hope, the dark lord encounters Luke for the first time.
Star Wars: Empire (2002–2005) spans from about a year before A New Hope to several months afterwards.
Anakin and Vader appear in the non-canonical Star Wars Tales (1999–2005); in the story Resurrection, Darth Maul is resurrected and faces Vader in battle.
Vader-centric comics released and set just after Revenge of the Sith include Dark Times (2006–2013), Darth Vader and the Lost Command (2011), Darth Vader and the Ghost Prison (2012), and Darth Vader and the Cry of Shadows (2013–14).

===
Video games ===
Darth Vader and Anakin Skywalker have appeared in a number of Star Wars since the earliest days of the franchise, though rarely as a playable character.
Vader plays a central role in Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed (2008), where he is the playable character for the first level of the game.
He also appears in the sequel Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed II as the final boss.
Darth Vader has also appeared in non-Star Wars video games as a guest character, for example Soulcalibur IV (2008).

Most recently, Vader makes a cameo appearance in the final mission of Star Wars Jedi:
Fallen Order, after the main antagonist, the Second Sister, is defeated.
After Vader kills her for her failure to retrieve a Jedi Holocron, the protagonist, Padawan Cal Kestis, must escape from Vader, who attempts to get the Holocron in his possession.
Cal is ultimately able to escape from Vader's grasp with the help of his allies.

===
Other ===
In the Star Wars Holiday Special, a television special broadcast by CBS in 1978, features a brief appearance by Darth Vader, who appears on-screen speaking with Imperial officer "Chief Bast" in footage cut from the original 1977 film.
The sequence is dubbed with new dialogue, performed by James Earl Jones.
In the story, Vader colludes with Boba Fett to entrap the Rebels.
Darth Vader features in the 1981 radio drama adaptation of Star Wars, voiced by the actor Brock Peters.
Vader makes his first appearance on the planet Ralltiir, where he treats Princess Leia with suspicion.
In later extended scenes, he is heard interrogating and torturing Leia on board his Star Destroyer and aboard the Death Star.
Vader appears in Star Tours –
The Adventures Continue, where he is once again voiced by Jones.
An action figure of Vader comes to life alongside RoboCop and Jurassic Park toys in The Indian in the Cupboard (1995).
Vader also had a brief cameo in Night at the Museum: Battle of the Smithsonian (2009), in which he and Oscar the Grouch try unsuccessfully to join the army formed by Ivan the Terrible, Napoleon and Al Capone.

==
Cultural impact ==
In 1977, a writer for New Journal and Guide criticized the lack of racial diversity in the original Star Wars film, pointing out that "the force of evil ... is dressed in all black and has the voice of a black man."
George Lucas felt hurt at such accusations.
Psychiatrists have considered Vader to be a useful example for explaining borderline personality disorder to medical students.
Anakin's origin story in The Phantom Menace has been compared to signifiers of African American racial identity, particularly his being a slave, and his dissatisfaction with his life has been compared to Siddartha's before he became Gautama Buddha.
A Mexican church advised Christians against seeing The Phantom Menace because it portrays Anakin as a Christ figure.

Many films and television series have paid homage to Darth Vader.
The 1982 movie Cosmic Princess, compiled from parts of Space: 1999 episodes, contains several Star Wars references including a character named "Vader".
Marty McFly in Back to the Future (1985), dressed in a radiation suit, calls himself "Darth Vader from the planet Vulcan" in one scene.
Vader is parodied as "Dark Helmet" (Rick Moranis) in the Star Wars parody Spaceballs (1987).
A primary antagonist in Final Fantasy IV (1991) was stated by game creator Takashi Tokita to be based on Vader.
In Chasing Amy (1997), Hooper X (Dwight Ewell) speaks at a comic book convention about Darth Vader being a metaphor for how poorly the science fiction genre treats Black people; he is especially offended that Vader, the "Blackest brother in the galaxy", reveals himself to be a "feeble, crusty old white man" at the end of Return of the Jedi.
Vader, especially his role as a father, is parodied as Emperor Zurg in Toy Story 2.
The character of Dark Mayhem in The Thundermans is also a parody of Vader, especially in his original depiction.
The Warner Bros. animated show
Loonatics Unleashed has a Sylvester the Cat-type character named Sylth Vester, a play on Vader and his name.

The slime-mold beetle Agathidium vaderi is named after Vader, and several buildings across the globe are regularly compared to him.
A grotesque of Darth Vader looms over the east face of the Washington National Cathedral's northwest tower.
During the 2007–08 NHL season, Ottawa Senators goaltender Martin Gerber performed so well in an all-black mask that fans endearingly termed him "Darth Gerber".
Many commentators and comedians have also evoked Vader's visage to satirize politicians and other public figures, and several American political figures have been unflatteringly compared to the character.
In response to Ronald Reagan's proposed Strategic Defense Initiative (dubbed "Star Wars" by his political opponents), German news magazine Der Spiegel portrayed the president wearing Vader's helmet on its cover in 1984.
In 2005, Al Gore referred to Tele-Communications Inc.'s John C. Malone as the "Darth Vader of cable", and political strategist Lee Atwater was known by his political enemies as "the Darth Vader of the Republican Party".
Native American artist Bunky Echohawk portrayed General George Armstrong Custer as Vader in his painting Darth Custer.
In 2015, a statue of Vladimir Lenin in Odessa, Ukraine, was converted into one of Vader due to a law on decommunization.
In 2006, while discussing the war on terror, US Vice President Dick Cheney stated, "I suppose, sometimes, people look at my demeanor and say, 'Well, he's the Darth Vader of the administration.'"

In January 2007, Jon Stewart put on a Vader helmet to address Cheney as a "kindred spirit" on The Daily Show.
Cheney's wife, Lynne, presented Stewart with a Darth Vader action figure on her October 2007 appearance on the show.
Both Stewart and Stephen Colbert have occasionally referred to Cheney as "Darth Cheney".
In the satirical cartoon show Lil' Bush, Cheney's father is portrayed as Vader.
At a presidential campaign event in September 2007, Hillary Clinton also referred to Cheney as Vader.
At the 2008 Washington Radio and Television Correspondents' Association Dinner, Cheney joked that his wife told him that the Vader comparison "humanizes" him.
In 2009, George Lucas stated that Cheney is more akin to Palpatine, and that a better stand-in for Vader would be George W. Bush.
An issue of Newsweek referenced this quote, and compared Bush and Cheney to Vader and Palpatine, respectively, in a satirical article comparing politicians to various Star Wars and Star Trek characters.
In 2010, IGN ranked Darth Vader 25th in the "Top 100 Videogame Villains".
In Ukraine, the Internet Party of Ukraine regularly lets people named Darth Vader take part in elections.
In 2019, an original Vader helmet from The Empire Strikes Back was sold for $900,000 in an online auction.
On 2 December 2020, a figurine of Darth Vader appeared on the plinth where the statue of Edward Colston once stood in Bristol, United Kingdom, in what was seen as a tribute to the actor Dave Prowse, who died on 29 November 2020.

==
Relationships ==


===
Family tree ===


===
Mentorship tree ===


==
References ==
Footnotes
Citations


===
Sources ===


==
Further reading ==


==
External links ==
Darth Vader in the StarWars.com Databank
Anakin Skywalker in the StarWars.com Databank
Anakin Skywalker / Darth Vader on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Darth Vader on IMDb
"Darth Vader".
Encyclopædia Britannica.
George Walton Lucas Jr.
(born May 14, 1944) is an American film director, producer, screenwriter, and entrepreneur.
Lucas is best known for creating the Star Wars and Indiana Jones franchises and founding Lucasfilm, LucasArts, and Industrial Light & Magic.
He served as chairman of Lucasfilm before selling it to The Walt Disney Company in 2012.
Lucas is one of history's most financially successful filmmakers and has been nominated for four Academy Awards.
His films are among the 100 highest-grossing movies at the North American box office, adjusted for ticket-price inflation.
Lucas is considered a significant figure of the 20th-century New Hollywood movement.

After graduating from the University of Southern California in 1967, Lucas co-founded American Zoetrope with filmmaker Francis Ford Coppola.
Lucas wrote and directed THX 1138 (1971), based on his earlier student short Electronic Labyrinth:
THX 1138 4EB, which was a critical success but a financial failure.
His next work as a writer-director was the film American Graffiti (1973), inspired by his youth in the early 1960s
Modesto, California, and produced through the newly founded Lucasfilm.
The film was critically and commercially successful and received five Academy Award nominations, including Best Picture.

Lucas's next film, the epic space opera Star Wars (1977), had a troubled production but was a surprise hit, becoming the highest-grossing film at the time, winning six Academy Awards and sparking a cultural phenomenon.
Lucas produced and co-wrote the sequels The Empire Strikes Back (1980) and Return of the Jedi (1983).
With director Steven Spielberg, he created, produced, and co-wrote the Indiana Jones films Raiders of the Lost Ark (1981), The Temple of Doom (1984), The Last Crusade (1989) and The Kingdom of the Crystal Skull (2008).
Lucas is also known for his collaboration with composer John Williams, who was recommended to him by Spielberg, and with whom he has worked with for all the films in both of these franchises.
He also produced and wrote a variety of films and television series through Lucasfilm between the 1970s and the 2010s.

In 1997, Lucas re-released the Star Wars Trilogy as part of a special edition featuring several alterations; home media versions with further changes were released in 2004 and 2011.
He returned to directing with a Star Wars prequel trilogy comprising Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace (1999), Star Wars:
Episode II – Attack of the Clones (2002) and Star Wars: Episode III – Revenge of the Sith (2005).
He last collaborated on the CGI-animated television series Star Wars:
The Clone Wars (2008–2014, 2020), the war film Red Tails (2012), and the CGI film Strange Magic (2015).
==
Early life ==
Lucas was born and raised in Modesto, California, the son of Dorothy Ellinore Lucas (née Bomberger) and George Walton Lucas Sr.,
and is of German, Swiss-German, English, Scottish, and distant Dutch and French descent.
His family attended Disneyland during its opening week in July 1955, and Lucas would remain enthusiastic about the park.
He was interested in comics and science fiction, including television programs such as the Flash Gordon serials.
Long before Lucas began making films, he yearned to be a racecar driver, and he spent most of his high school years racing on the underground circuit at fairgrounds and hanging out at garages.
On June 12, 1962, a few days before his high school graduation, Lucas was driving his souped-up Autobianchi Bianchina when another driver broadsided him, flipping his car several times before it crashed into a tree; Lucas's seatbelt had snapped, ejecting him and thereby saving his life.
However, his lungs were bruised from severe hemorrhaging and he required emergency medical treatment.
This incident caused him to lose interest in racing as a career, but also inspired him to pursue his other interests.
Lucas's father owned a stationery store, and had wanted George to work for him when he turned 18.
Lucas had been planning to go to art school, and declared upon leaving home that he would be a millionaire by the age of 30.
He attended Modesto Junior College, where he studied anthropology, sociology, and literature, amongst other subjects.
He also began shooting with an 8 mm camera, including filming car races.

At this time, Lucas and his friend John Plummer became interested in Canyon Cinema: screenings of underground, avant-garde 16 mm filmmakers like Jordan Belson, Stan Brakhage, and Bruce Conner.
Lucas and Plummer also saw classic European films of the time, including Jean-Luc Godard's Breathless, François Truffaut's Jules et Jim, and Federico Fellini's 8½.
"That's when George really started exploring," Plummer said.
Through his interest in autocross racing, Lucas met renowned cinematographer Haskell Wexler, another race enthusiast.
Wexler, later to work with Lucas on several occasions, was impressed by Lucas' talent. "
George had a very good eye, and he thought visually," he recalled.
At Plummer's recommendation, Lucas then transferred to the University of Southern California (USC) School of Cinematic Arts.
USC was one of the earliest universities to have a school devoted to motion picture film.
During the years at USC, Lucas shared a dorm room with Randal Kleiser.
Along with classmates such as Walter Murch, Hal Barwood, and John Milius, they became a clique of film students known as The Dirty Dozen.
He also became good friends with fellow acclaimed student filmmaker and future Indiana Jones collaborator, Steven Spielberg.
Lucas was deeply influenced by the Filmic Expression course taught at the school by filmmaker Lester Novros which concentrated on the non-narrative elements of Film Form like color, light, movement, space, and time.
Another inspiration was the Serbian montagist (and dean of the USC Film Department)
Slavko Vorkapić, a film theoretician who made stunning montage sequences for Hollywood studio features at MGM, RKO, and Paramount.
Vorkapich taught the autonomous nature of the cinematic art form, emphasizing kinetic energy inherent in motion pictures.

==
Film career ==


===
1965–1969:
Early career ===
Lucas saw many inspiring films in class, particularly the visual films coming out of the National Film Board of Canada like Arthur Lipsett's 21-87, the French-Canadian cameraman Jean-Claude Labrecque's cinéma vérité 60 Cycles, the work of Norman McLaren, and the documentaries of Claude Jutra.
Lucas fell madly in love with pure cinema and quickly became prolific at making 16 mm nonstory noncharacter visual tone poems and cinéma vérité with such titles as Look at Life, Herbie, 1:42.08, The Emperor, Anyone Lived in a Pretty (how) Town, Filmmaker, and 6-18-67.
He was passionate and interested in camerawork and editing, defining himself as a filmmaker as opposed to being a director, and he loved making abstract visual films that created emotions purely through cinema.
After graduating with a bachelor of fine arts in film in 1967, he tried joining the United States Air Force as an officer, but he was immediately turned down because of his numerous speeding tickets.
He was later drafted by the Army for military service in Vietnam, but he was exempted from service after medical tests showed he had diabetes, the disease that killed his paternal grandfather.

In 1967, Lucas re-enrolled as a USC graduate student in film production.
He began working under Verna Fields for the United States Information Agency, where he met his future wife Marcia Griffin.
Working as a teaching instructor for a class of U.S. Navy students who were being taught documentary cinematography, Lucas directed the short film Electronic Labyrinth: THX 1138 4EB, which won first prize at the 1967–68 National Student film festival.
Lucas was awarded a student scholarship by Warner Bros. to observe and work on the making of a film of his choosing.
The film he chose was Finian's Rainbow (1968) which was being directed by Francis Ford Coppola, who was revered among film school students of the time as a cinema graduate who had "made it" in Hollywood.
In 1969, Lucas was one of the camera operators on the classic Rolling Stones concert film Gimme Shelter.

=== 1969–1977:
THX 1138, American Graffiti, and Star Wars ===
In 1969, Lucas co-founded the studio American Zoetrope with Coppola, hoping to create a liberating environment for filmmakers to direct outside the perceived oppressive control of the Hollywood studio system.
Coppola thought Lucas's Electronic Labyrinth could be adapted into his first full-length feature film, which was produced by American Zoetrope as THX 1138, but was not a success.
Lucas then created his own company, Lucasfilm, Ltd., and directed the successful American Graffiti (1973).

Lucas then set his sights on adapting Flash Gordon, an adventure serial from his childhood that he fondly remembered.
When he was unable to obtain the rights, he set out to write an original space adventure that would eventually become Star Wars.
Despite his success with his previous film, all but one studio turned Star Wars down.
It was only because
Alan Ladd, Jr., at 20th Century Fox liked American Graffiti that he forced through a production and distribution deal for the film, which ended up restoring Fox to financial stability after a number of flops.
Star Wars was significantly influenced by samurai films of Akira Kurosawa, Spaghetti Westerns, as well as classic sword and sorcery fantasy stories.

Star Wars quickly became the highest-grossing film of all-time, displaced five years later by Spielberg's E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial.
After the success of American Graffiti and prior to the beginning of filming on Star Wars, Lucas was encouraged to renegotiate for a higher fee for writing and directing Star Wars than the $150,000 agreed.
He declined to do so, instead negotiating for advantage in some of the as-yet-unspecified parts of his contract with Fox, in particular, ownership of licensing and merchandising rights (for novelizations, clothing, toys, etc.)
and contractual arrangements for sequels.
Lucasfilm has earned hundreds of millions of dollars from licensed games, toys, and collectibles created for the franchise.
The original Star Wars film went through a tumultuous production, and during editing, Lucas suffered chest pains initially feared to be a heart attack, but actually a fit of hypertension and exhaustion.
The effort that Lucas exerted during post-production for the film, and its subsequent sequels, caused strains on his relationship with his wife Marcia Lucas, and was a contributing factor to their divorce at the end of the trilogy.

=== 1977–1993: Hiatus from directing, Indiana Jones ===
Following the release of the first Star Wars film, Lucas worked extensively as a writer and producer, including on the many Star Wars spinoffs made for film, television, and other media.
Lucas acted as executive producer for the next two Star Wars films, commissioning Irvin Kershner to direct The Empire Strikes Back, and
Richard Marquand to direct Return of the Jedi, while receiving a story credit on the former and sharing a screenwriting credit with Lawrence Kasdan on the latter.
He also acted as story writer and executive producer on all four of the Indiana Jones films, which his colleague and good friend Steven Spielberg directed.

Other successful projects where Lucas acted as an executive producer and sometimes story writer in this period include Kurosawa's Kagemusha (1980), Ewoks: Caravan of Courage (1984), Ewoks: Battle for Endor (1985), Jim Henson's Labyrinth (1986), Godfrey Reggio's Powaqqatsi (1986), Don Bluth's The Land Before Time (1988), and the Indiana Jones television spinoff
The Young Indiana Jones Chronicles (1992–96).
There were unsuccessful projects, however, including More American Graffiti (1979), Willard Huyck's Howard the Duck (1986), which was the biggest flop of Lucas's career, Ron Howard's Willow (1988), Coppola's Tucker: The Man and His Dream (1988), and Mel Smith's Radioland Murders (1994).

The animation studio Pixar was founded in 1979 as the Graphics Group, one third of the Computer Division of Lucasfilm.
Pixar's early computer graphics research resulted in groundbreaking effects in films such as Star Trek II:
The Wrath of Khan and Young Sherlock Holmes, and the group was purchased in 1986 by Steve Jobs shortly after he left Apple Computer.
Jobs paid Lucas US$5 million and put US$5 million as capital into the company.
The sale reflected Lucas' desire to stop the cash flow losses from his 7-year research projects associated with new entertainment technology tools, as well as his company's new focus on creating entertainment products rather than tools.
As of June 1983, Lucas was worth US$60 million, but he met cash-flow difficulties following his divorce that year, concurrent with the sudden dropoff in revenues from Star Wars licenses following the theatrical run of Return of the Jedi.
At this point, Lucas had no desire to return to Star Wars, and had unofficially canceled the sequel trilogy.
Also in 1983, Lucas and Tomlinson Holman founded
the audio company THX Ltd. The company was formerly owned by Lucasfilm, and contains equipment for stereo, digital, and theatrical sound for films, and music.
Skywalker Sound and Industrial Light & Magic, are the sound and visual effects subdivisions of Lucasfilm, while Lucasfilm Games, later renamed LucasArts, produces products for the gaming industry.

=== 1993–2012
: Return to directing, Star Wars and Indiana Jones ===
Having lost much of his fortune in a divorce settlement in 1987, Lucas was reluctant to return to Star Wars.
However, the prequels, which were still only a series of basic ideas partially pulled from his original drafts of "The Star Wars", continued to tantalize him with technical possibilities that would make it worthwhile to revisit his older material.
When Star Wars became popular once again, in the wake of Dark Horse's comic book line and Timothy Zahn's trilogy of spin-off novels, Lucas realized that there was still a large audience.
His children were older, and with the explosion of CGI technology he began to consider directing once again.
By 1993, it was announced, in Variety among other sources, that Lucas would be making the prequels.
He began penning more to the story, indicating that the series would be a tragic one, examining Anakin Skywalker's fall to the dark side.
Lucas also began to change the prequels status relative to the originals; at first, they were supposed to be a "filling-in" of history tangential to the originals, but now he saw that they could form the beginning of one long story that started with Anakin's childhood and ended with his death.
This was the final step towards turning the film series into a "Saga".
In 1994, Lucas began work on the screenplay of the first prequel, tentatively titled Episode I: The Beginning.

In 1997, to celebrate the 20th anniversary of Star Wars, Lucas returned to the original trilogy and made numerous modifications using newly available digital technology, releasing them in theaters as the Star Wars Special Edition.
For DVD releases in 2004 and Blu-ray releases in 2011, the trilogy received further revisions to make them congruent with the prequel trilogy.
Besides the additions to the Star Wars franchise, Lucas released a Director's Cut of THX 1138 in 2004, with the film re-cut and containing a number of CGI revisions.

The first Star Wars prequel was finished and released in 1999 as Episode I – The Phantom Menace, which would be the first film Lucas had directed in over two decades.
Following the release of the first prequel, Lucas announced that he would also be directing the next two, and began working on Episode II.
The first draft of Episode II was completed just weeks before principal photography, and Lucas hired Jonathan Hales, a writer from The Young Indiana Jones Chronicles, to polish it.
It was completed and released in 2002 as Star Wars: Episode II – Attack of the Clones.
The final prequel, Star Wars:
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith, began production in 2002 and was released in 2005.
Numerous fans and critics considered the prequels inferior to the original trilogy, though they were box office successes.

Lucas collaborated with Jeff Nathanson as a writer of the 2008 film Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull, directed by Steven Spielberg.
Like the Star Wars prequels, reception was mixed, with numerous fans and critics once again considering it inferior to its predecessors.
From 2008 to 2014, Lucas also served as the creator and executive producer and for a second Star Wars animated series on Cartoon Network, Star Wars:
The Clone Wars which premiered with a feature film of the same name before airing its first episode.
The supervising director for this series was Dave Filoni, who was chosen by Lucas and closely collaborated with him on its development.
Series
it bridged the events between Attack of the Clones and Revenge of the Sith.
The animated series also featured the last Star Wars stories on which Lucas was majorly involved.

In 2012, Lucas served as executive producer for Red Tails, a war film based on the exploits of the Tuskegee Airmen during World War II.
He also took over direction of reshoots while director Anthony Hemingway worked on other projects.

===
2012–present:
Semi-retirement ===
In January 2012, Lucas announced his retirement from producing large blockbuster films and instead re-focusing his career on smaller, independently budgeted features.
In June 2012, it was announced that producer Kathleen Kennedy, a long-term collaborator with Steven Spielberg and a producer of the Indiana Jones films, had been appointed as co-chair of
Lucasfilm Ltd. It was reported that Kennedy would work alongside Lucas, who would remain chief executive and serve as co-chairman for at least one year, after which she would succeed him as the company's sole leader.
With the sale of Lucasfilm to Disney, Lucas is currently Disney's second largest single shareholder after the estate of Steve Jobs.
Lucas worked as a creative consultant on the Star Wars sequel trilogy's first film, The Force Awakens.
As creative consultant on the film, Lucas' involvement included attending early story meetings; according to Lucas, "I mostly say, 'You can't do this.
You can do that.'
You know, 'The cars don't have wheels.
They fly with antigravity.'
There's a million little pieces ...
I know all that stuff.
"
Lucas' son Jett told The Guardian that his father was "very torn" about having sold the rights to the franchise, despite having hand-picked Abrams to direct, and that his father was "there to guide" but that "he wants to let it go and become its new generation."
Among the materials turned over to the production team were rough story treatments Lucas developed when he considered creating episodes VII–IX
himself years earlier; in January 2015, Lucas stated that Disney had discarded his story ideas.

The Force Awakens, directed by J. J. Abrams, was released on December 18, 2015.
Kathleen Kennedy executive produced the film and its sequels.
The new sequel trilogy was jointly produced by Lucasfilm and The Walt Disney Company, which had acquired Lucasfilm in 2012.
During an interview with talk show host and journalist Charlie Rose that aired on December 24, 2015, Lucas likened his decision to sell Lucasfilm to Disney to a divorce and outlined the creative differences between him and the producers of The Force Awakens.
Lucas described the previous six Star Wars films as his "children" and defended his vision for them, while criticizing The Force Awakens for having a "retro feel", saying, "I worked very hard to make them completely different, with different planets, with different spaceships – you know, to make it new."
Lucas also drew some criticism and subsequently apologized for his remark likening Disney to "white slavers".
In 2015, Lucas wrote the CGI film Strange Magic, his first musical.
The film was produced at Skywalker Ranch.
Gary Rydstrom directed the movie.
At the same time the sequel trilogy was announced a fifth installment of the Indiana Jones series also entered pre-development phase with Harrison Ford and Steven Spielberg set to return.
Lucas originally did not specify whether the selling of Lucasfilm would affect his involvement with the film.
In October 2016, Lucas announced his decision to not be involved in the story of the film, but would remain an executive producer.
In 2016, Rogue One: A Star Wars Story, the first film of a Star Wars anthology series was released.
It told the story of the rebels who stole the plans for the Death Star featured in the original Star Wars film, and it was reported that Lucas liked it more than The Force Awakens.
The Last Jedi, the second film in the sequel trilogy, was released in 2017; Lucas described the film as "beautifully made".
Lucas has had cursory involvement with Solo:
A Star Wars Story (2018), the Star Wars streaming series The Mandalorian, and the premiere of the eighth season of Game of Thrones.
Lucas met with J. J. Abrams before the latter began writing the script to the sequel trilogy's final film, The Rise of Skywalker, which was released in 2019.

===
Collaboration with John Williams ===
Lucas was also heavily involved and invested in the scoring process for the original Star Wars soundtrack, which was composed by John Williams, on the recommendation of his friend and colleague Steven Spielberg.
Whilst initially wanting to use tracks and film music in a similar manner to 2001: A Space Odyssey, which served as the inspiration for the film, Williams advised against this and instead proposed a system of recurring themes (or leitmotifs) to enhance the story in the style of classical composers Gustav Holst, William Walton, and Igor Stravinsky; works that Lucas had used as "temp tracks" for Williams to gain inspiration from.

The film, and subsequent sequels and prequels, make use of the Main Title Theme, the Force Theme (less commonly referred to as Obi Wan Kenobi's Theme), the Rebel Alliance Theme, and Princess Leia's Theme (all introduced in this film) repeatedly.

The score was released to critical acclaim, and won Williams his third Academy Award for Best Original Score.
The score was listed by the American Film Institute in 2005 as the greatest film score of all time.
The professional relationship formed by Lucas and Williams extended through to Williams working on all of Lucas' blockbuster franchise movies: the remaining two films of the Star Wars original trilogy; all three films of prequel trilogy developed over fifteen years later; and the four (to be five) films of the Indiana Jones franchise, in which Williams reunited with his long-time collaborator Spielberg.
In his collaborations with Lucas, Williams received six of his fifty-two Academy Award nominations (Star Wars, The Empire Strikes Back, Return of the Jedi, Raiders of the Lost Ark, Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom, and Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade).
After Lucas sold Lucasfilm to Disney, Williams stayed on board with the franchise, and continued to score the remaining three films of the "Skywalker saga" (The Force Awakens, The Last Jedi, and The Rise of Skywalker), after which he announced his "retirement" from the series.
Lucas was in attendance for a ceremony honouring Williams as the 44th recipient of the AFI Life Achievement Award, the first composer to receive the honour, and gave a speech in praise of their relationship and his work.

==
Philanthropy ==
Lucas is one of the wealthiest celebrities in the world.
Lucas has pledged to give half of his fortune to charity as part of an effort called The Giving Pledge led by Bill Gates and Warren Buffett to persuade America's richest individuals to donate their financial wealth to charities.

===
George Lucas Educational Foundation ===
In 1991, The George Lucas Educational Foundation was founded as a nonprofit operating foundation to celebrate and encourage innovation in schools.
The Foundation's content is available under the brand Edutopia, in an award-winning web site, social media and via documentary films.
Lucas, through his foundation, was one of the leading proponents of the E-rate program in the universal service fund, which was enacted as part of the Telecommunications Act of 1996.
On June 24, 2008, Lucas testified before the United States House of Representatives subcommittee on Telecommunications and the Internet as the head of his Foundation to advocate for a free wireless broadband educational network.

===
Proceeds from the sale of Lucasfilm to Disney ===
In 2012, Lucas sold Lucasfilm to The Walt Disney Company for a reported sum of $4.05 billion.
It was widely reported at the time that Lucas intends to give the majority of the proceeds from the sale to charity.
A spokesperson for Lucasfilm said, "George Lucas has expressed his intention, in the event the deal closes, to donate the majority of the proceeds to his philanthropic endeavors."
Lucas also spoke on the matter: "For 41 years, the majority of my time and money has been put into the company.
As I start a new chapter in my life, it is gratifying that I have the opportunity to devote more time and resources to philanthropy."
===
Lucas Museum of Narrative Art ===
By June 2013, Lucas was considering establishing a museum, the Lucas Cultural Arts Museum, to be built on Crissy Field near the Golden Gate Bridge in San Francisco, which would display his collection of illustrations and pop art, with an estimated value of more than $1 billion.
Lucas offered to pay the estimated $300 million cost of constructing the museum, and would endow it with $400 million when it opened, eventually adding an additional $400 million to its endowment.
After being unable to reach an agreement with The Presidio Trust, Lucas turned to Chicago.
A potential lakefront site on Museum Campus in Chicago was proposed in May 2014.
By June 2014, Chicago had been selected, pending approval of the Chicago Plan Commission, which was granted.
The museum project was renamed the Lucas Museum of Narrative Art.

On June 24, 2016, Lucas announced that he was abandoning his plans to locate the museum in Chicago, due to a lawsuit by a local preservation group, Friends of the Parks, and would instead build the museum in California.
On January 17, 2017, Lucas announced that the museum will be constructed in Exposition Park, Los Angeles California.

===
Other initiatives ===
In 2005, Lucas gave US$1 million to help build the Martin Luther King Jr. Memorial on the National Mall in Washington D.C. to commemorate American civil rights leader Martin Luther King Jr.
On September 19, 2006, USC announced that Lucas had donated $175–180 million to his alma mater to expand the film school.
It is the largest single donation to USC and the largest gift to a film school anywhere.
Previous donations led to the already-existing George Lucas Instructional Building and Marcia Lucas Post-Production building.
In 2013, Lucas and his wife Mellody Hobson donated $25 million to the Chicago-based not-for-profit After School Matters, of which Hobson is the chair.
On April 15, 2016, it was reported that Lucas had donated between $501,000 and $1 million through the Lucas Family Foundation to the Obama Foundation, which is charged with overseeing the construction of the Barack Obama Presidential Center on Chicago's South Side.

==
Personal life ==
In 1969, Lucas married film editor Marcia Lou Griffin, who went on to win an Academy Award for her editing work on the original Star Wars film.
They adopted a daughter, Amanda Lucas, in 1981, and divorced in 1983.
Lucas subsequently adopted two more children as a single parent: daughter Katie Lucas, born in 1988, and son Jett Lucas, born in 1993.
His three eldest children all appeared in the three Star Wars prequels, as did Lucas himself.
Following his divorce, Lucas was in a relationship with singer Linda Ronstadt in the 1980s.
Lucas began dating Mellody Hobson, president of Ariel Investments and chair of DreamWorks Animation, in 2006.
Lucas and Hobson announced their engagement in January 2013, and married on June 22, 2013, at Lucas's Skywalker Ranch in Marin County, California.
They have one daughter together, born via gestational carrier in August 2013.Lucas
was born and raised in a Methodist family.
The religious and mythical themes in Star Wars were inspired by Lucas's interest in the writings of mythologist Joseph Campbell, and he would eventually come to identify strongly with the Eastern religious philosophies he studied and incorporated into his films, which were a major inspiration for "the Force".
Lucas has come to state that his religion is "Buddhist Methodist".
He resides in Marin County.
Lucas is a major collector of the American illustrator and painter Norman Rockwell.
A collection of 57 Rockwell paintings and drawings owned by Lucas and fellow Rockwell collector and film director Steven Spielberg were displayed at the Smithsonian American Art Museum from July 2, 2010, to January 2, 2011, in an exhibition titled Telling Stories.
Lucas has said that he is a fan of Seth MacFarlane's hit TV show Family Guy.
MacFarlane has said that Lucasfilm was extremely helpful when the Family Guy crew wanted to parody their works.
Lucas supported Democratic candidate Hillary Clinton in the run-up for the 2016 U.S. presidential election.

==
Awards and honors ==
In 1977, Lucas was awarded the Inkpot Award.
The American Film Institute awarded Lucas its Life Achievement Award on June 9, 2005.
This was shortly after the release of Star Wars:
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith, about which he joked stating that, since he views the entire Star Wars series as one film, he could actually receive the award now that he had finally "gone back and finished the movie."

Lucas was nominated for four Academy Awards: Best Directing and Writing for American Graffiti and Star Wars.
He received the Academy's Irving G. Thalberg Award in 1991.
He appeared at the 79th Academy Awards ceremony in 2007 with Steven Spielberg and Francis Ford Coppola to present the Best Director award to their friend Martin Scorsese.
During the speech, Spielberg and Coppola talked about the joy of winning an Oscar, making fun of Lucas, who has not won a competitive Oscar.

The Science Fiction Hall of Fame inducted Lucas in 2006, its second "Film, Television, and Media" contributor, after Spielberg.
The Discovery Channel named him one of the 100 "Greatest Americans" in September 2008.
Lucas served as Grand Marshal for the Tournament of Roses Parade and made the ceremonial coin toss at the Rose Bowl, New Year's Day 2007.
In 2009, he was one of 13 California Hall of Fame inductees in The California Museum's yearlong exhibit.

In July 2013, Lucas was awarded the National Medal of Arts by President Barack Obama for his contributions to American cinema.
In October 2014, Lucas received Honorary Membership of the Society of Motion Picture and Television Engineers.
In August 2015, Lucas was inducted as a Disney Legend, and on December 6, 2015, he was an honoree at the Kennedy Center Honors.

==
Filmography ==


==
Written works ==
1980:
Alan Arnold: A Journal of the Making of "
The Empire Strikes Back.
"
ISBN 0-345-29075-5.
(
contributor)
1983:
Dale Pollock:
Sky Walking:
The Life and Films of George Lucas.
ISBN 978-0517546772.
(
contributor)
1995:
George Lucas, Chris Claremont: Shadow Moon.
ISBN 0-553-57285-7.
(
story)
1996:
Chris Claremont: Shadow Dawn.
ISBN 0-553-57289-X. (story)
1997:
Laurent Bouzereau:
Star Wars.
The Annotated Screenplays.
(
contributor) ISBN 0-345-40981-7.
2000:
Terry Brooks:
Star Wars:
Episode
I:
The Phantom Menace (novelization, contributor), Del Rey Books, ISBN 978-0-09-940996-0
2000: Chris Claremont: Shadow Star.
ISBN 0-553-57288-1.
(
story)
2003: R. A. Salvatore:
Star Wars:
Episode II – Attack of the Clones (novelization, contributor), Del Rey, ISBN 978-0345428820
2004: Matthew Stover: Shatterpoint.
(
novel, prologue), Del Rey, ISBN 978-0345455741.

2005:
James Luceno: Labyrinth of Evil (novel, contributor), Del Rey, ISBN 978-0345475732
2005:
Matthew Stover:
Star Wars:
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith.,
Del Rey, ISBN 978-0345428844.
(
novelization, contributor & line editor)
2007:
J. W. Rinzler:
The Making of "Star Wars".
The Definitive Story Behind the Original Film.
ISBN 0-09-192014-0.
(
contributor)
2012:
James Luceno:
Star Wars: Darth Plagueis.
novel (contributor), Del Rey, ISBN 978-0345511294.

2020:
Paul Duncan:
The Star Wars Archives.
1999–2005
(contributor), Taschen, ISBN 978-3836563444


==
References ==
Footnotes
Citations


===
Sources ===
Jones, Brian Jay (2016).
George Lucas:
A Life.
New York City:
Little, Brown and Company.
ISBN 978-0316257442.

Kaminski, Michael (2008).
The Secret History of Star Wars.
Legacy Books Press.
ISBN 978-0978465230.

Rinzler, J.W. (2007).
The Making of Star Wars: The Definitive Story Behind the Original Film.
LucasBooks.
ISBN 978-0345494764.

==
Further reading ==
Kline, Sally, ed.
(
1999).
George Lucas:
Interviews.
University Press of Mississippi.
ISBN 978-1578061259.

Hearn, Marcus (2005).
The Cinema of George Lucas.
Harry N. Abrams.
ISBN 978-0810949683.

Rubin, Michael (2005).
Droidmaker:
George Lucas and the Digital Revolution.
Triad Publishing Company.
ISBN 978-0937404676.

==
External links ==
George Lucas at the Encyclopædia Britannica
"George Lucas biography".
Science Fiction and Fantasy Hall of Fame.

George Lucas at IMDb
George Lucas at AllMovie
George Lucas at the TCM Movie Database
George Lucas at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
George Lucas biography at Lucasfilm.com
Talking About George Lucas at The Interviews: An Oral History of Television
George Lucas at World of Business Ideas
The Jedi (), Jedi Knights, or the Knights of the Jedi Order are the main protagonists of many works of the Star Wars franchise, often working symbiotically alongside the Galactic Republic and the Rebel Alliance.
The Jedi Order are depicted as an ascetic, monastic, academic, and meritocratic organization whose origin dates back approximately 25,000 years before the events of the first film released in the franchise.
The fictional organization has inspired a real-world new religious movement, Jediism.
The Jedi Order were powerful Force-wielding "sorcerers'" and adjudicators tasked by the Galactic Republic to be the guardians of peace and order in the Star Wars galaxy, with galaxy-wide jurisdiction in the Galactic Republic, headquartered in the Republic City, Coruscant capital.
Their creed demands that they defend and protect all sapient life, and must never attack or act aggressively.
The Order consisted of polymaths representing the best of what the Republic had to offer, their members were required to be equal parts teachers, philosophers, scientists, engineers, physicians, diplomats, negotiators, soldiers, explorers, and peacekeepers.

A level of diversity extends throughout the organization, composed of hundreds of different species, thousands of different worlds, and those outside the Republic itself.
When operating beyond the limits of Republic territory, they were expected to have the moral capacity to act autonomously and make decisions, without oversight or support, with the potential to drastically affect both the future of the Republic and countless lives.
They were often the first representatives of the Republic encountered by new species and nations.
Throughout its existence, the Jedi have investigated crimes ranging from murder to political corruption, acted as peacekeepers and as detectives, protected the chancellors of the Republic, tracked down fugitives, and functioned as a investigative law enforcement agency and quasi-militaristic force at the service of the Republic.

The Jedi Order moral value system viewed purity of thought and detachment of emotions as essential to "Force enlightenment".
Jedi philosophy emphasized self-improvement through knowledge and wisdom, adherence to slave morality, and selfless service through acts of chastity, charity, obedience, citizenship, and volunteerism; this ideology is a recurring theme in the Star Wars universe.
The Jedi denounce emotions as the root cause of mortal suffering; they believe fear, anger, and love cause sentient beings to lash out in conflict and impede rational action to do what is objectively correct action.
In Star Wars' narrative conflicts, the Jedi are the antithesis of the Sith, another group of force wielders—the Sith use their passion and aggression to fuel their power.
Ideologically, the Sith are "dark mirrors" to Jedi; Sith emphasize violence and domination, while Jedi instead teach co-existence and connecting with nature in the universe.

A Jedi's traditional weapon, is the lightsaber, a device which generates a blade-like plasma powered by a Kyber crystal or other focusing item.

==
Etymology ==
The word Jedi is said to have been adapted by George Lucas from Japanese 時代劇 (jidaigeki) (meaning 'period drama' motion pictures about samurai), or perhaps inspired by the words Jed (Leader) and Jeddak (King) in the Barsoom series by Edgar Rice Burroughs, a series that Lucas considered adapting to film.
The film Rogue One suggests that within the Star Wars mythology itself, it relates to the planet Jedha, source of the crystals used in lightsabers.

===
Influences ===
George Lucas acknowledged Jedi, Sith, and other Force concepts have been inspired by many sources.
These include: samurai's bushido, Shaolin Monks, Shamanism, Hindu mythology, Shintō, Buddhism not to mention countless cinematic precursors.
The works of philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche and mythologist Joseph Campbell, especially his book The Hero with a Thousand Faces (1949), directly influenced Lucas, and was what drove him to create the 'modern myth' of Star Wars.

== Depiction ==
As depicted in the canon, the Jedi study and utilize the Force, in order to help and protect those in need.
The Jedi members, known as Jedi Knights, respect all life by defending and protecting those who cannot do it for themselves, striving for peaceful and non-combative solutions to any altercations they encounter and fighting only in self-defense and for the defense of those they protect.
By training the mind and the body, the Jedi seek to improve themselves by gaining unfettered access to the Force while also seeking to improve those individuals and groups they come in contact with.
Like their evil counterparts, the Sith, the main weapon of the Jedi is the lightsaber.
However, according to Lucas, "The Force really doesn't have anything to do with the lightsaber.
Anybody can have a lightsaber.
It's just a weapon like a pistol.
"Qui-Gon Jinn gives us an insight into the Force in Episode I when he tells Anakin: "Your focus determines your reality."
And later, he explains: "Midi-chlorians are microscopic lifeforms that reside within all of your cells.
And we are symbionts with them.
Lifeforms living together for mutual advantage.
Without the midi-chlorians, life could not exist and we would have no knowledge of The Force.
They continually speak to us, telling us the will of The Force.
When you learn to quiet your mind you’ll hear them speaking to you."

In Episode IV, Obi-Wan Kenobi tells Luke Skywalker: "The force is what gives a Jedi his power.
It's an energy field created by all living things.
It surrounds us, penetrates us, it binds the galaxy together."
". . .
a Jedi can feel the force flowing through him.
It [partially] controls your actions, but it also obeys your commands."

===
The Skywalker saga ===


====
Original trilogy ====
For over a thousand generations, the Jedi Knights were the guardians of peace and justice in the Old Republic.
Before the dark times, before the Empire.

The Jedi are first introduced in the 1977 motion picture Star Wars as an order of warrior monks who serve as "the guardians of peace and justice in the galaxy" and embrace the mystical Force.
Obi-Wan Kenobi (Alec Guinness) explains that the Galactic Empire has all but exterminated the Jedi, and seeks to train Luke Skywalker (Mark Hamill) to be the Jedi Order's last hope.
Darth Vader (David Prowse/James Earl Jones) is also established as the Jedi's main enemy.
By the end of the film, which depicts the Battle of Yavin, Luke is on the path to becoming a Jedi.
In the sequel, The Empire Strikes Back, Luke receives extensive Jedi training from the elderly (and only surviving)
Jedi Master Yoda (Frank Oz), even as he learns that Vader is, in fact, his father, former Jedi Knight Anakin Skywalker.
The third film in the original trilogy, Return of the Jedi, ends with Luke redeeming Vader and helping to destroy the Empire, thus fulfilling his destiny as a Jedi.

The two last Jedi Masters die during the events of the films, after which they return as Force ghosts to help Luke.

====
Prequel
trilogy ====
The prequel trilogy depicts the Jedi in their prime, headquartered at the Jedi Temple on Coruscant, and dealing with the rising presence of the dark side of the Force and the return of the Sith.
In Episode I: The Phantom Menace (1999), Jedi Master Qui-Gon Jinn (Liam Neeson) discovers nine-year-old Anakin Skywalker (Jake Lloyd), whom he believes to be the "Chosen One" of a Jedi prophecy, destined to bring balance to the Force.
At the end of The Phantom Menace, Anakin is paired with Qui-Gon's apprentice, the young Obi-Wan Kenobi (Ewan McGregor), who promises to train him.

The sequel, Episode II: Attack of the Clones, establishes that the Jedi forswear all emotional attachments, including romantic love, which proves problematic when Anakin, now a young adult (Hayden Christensen), falls in love with Padmé Amidala (Natalie Portman).
The Clone Wars, first spoken of in the original 1977 film, begin with hundreds of Jedi participating in the Battle of Geonosis.

In Episode III: Revenge of the Sith, Yoda confides to Mace Windu (Samuel L. Jackson) that the prophecy of the Chosen One could have been misread.
Palpatine (Ian McDiarmid), who is revealed to be Darth Sidious, manipulates Anakin's love for Padmé and distrust of the Jedi in order to turn him to the dark side and become his Sith apprentice, Darth Vader.
The latter begins helping Sidious hunt down and destroy the Jedi, who are nearly exterminated during the events of Revenge of the Sith; Obi-Wan Kenobi and Yoda are among a handful of Jedi that avoided the initial purge.
As revealed in the Clone Wars series, each of the clones were implanted with chips that Palpatine would activate with the command Order 66: Operation Knightfall, a law that states:
In the event of Jedi officers acting against the interests of the Republic, and after receiving specific orders verified as coming directly from the Supreme Commander (Chancellor), GAR commanders will remove those officers by lethal force, and command of the GAR will revert to the Supreme Commander (Chancellor) until a new command structure is established.

This resulted in clone troopers to suddenly turn against their generals and kill them, and Darth Vader/Anakin Skywalker leading the 501st Legion to carry out "Operation Knightfall" against the Jedi Temple, burning and slaughtering all Jedi within including Temple-Defender Shaak Ti.
Sidious convinced the people of the Republic that the Jedi were corrupted warmongers responsible for prolonging the Clone Wars, labeling them criminals with bounties placed on them.
Darth Vader continued to hunt and kill nearly every surviving Jedi during the early years of the Empire, in what is known as the Great Jedi Purge; only Yoda survived long enough to die of old age, and Ahsoka Tano, who outlasted the Empire, while others like Obi-Wan and Kanan have died fighting the Empire years later.

====
Sequel
trilogy ====
Now that they're extinct, the Jedi are romanticized, deified.
But if you strip away the myth and look at their deeds, the legacy of the Jedi is failure.
Hypocrisy, hubris.
At the height of their powers, they allowed Darth Sidious to rise, create the Empire, and wipe them out.
It was a Jedi Master who was responsible for the training and creation of Darth Vader.

In The Force Awakens, the first film in the sequel trilogy, it is revealed that Luke had attempted to rebuild the Jedi Order, but failed when his nephew Ben Solo (Adam Driver) fell to the dark side, lured by the mysterious Snoke (Andy Serkis).
Ben is renamed Kylo Ren and destroys all that Luke built.
After Kylo's fall and the destruction of the New Jedi Order, Luke goes into a self-imposed exile on Ahch-To, believing himself and the Jedi to be a negative influence on the galaxy.
In the sequel The Last Jedi, the scavenger Rey (Daisy Ridley) discovers Luke on Ahch-To and convinces him to train her in the ways of the Force.
During her training, Luke describes the hubris of the past Jedi that allowed Darth Sidious to rise to power.
She also discovers several ancient Jedi texts hidden away in a tree.
Rey learns the truth about Ben's fall to the dark side and believes herself to be his only chance of redemption.
Luke decides to stay on Ahch-To and attempts to burn down the tree with the texts, but cannot bring himself to do so.
However, Yoda appears as a Force Ghost and burns the tree, teaching him that failure is just as important as success, and that masters are defined by those who surpass them.
Near the end of the film, Luke confronts Kylo on the planet Crait.
It is subsequently revealed that Luke had been projecting himself from Ahch-To; he dies from the effort and becomes one with the Force.
Rey is shown to have taken the sacred Jedi texts before she left Ahch-To, in order to continue her training.
In The Rise of Skywalker, the final film of the sequel trilogy, it is discovered that Darth Sidious has returned from death and has been secretly manipulating events from the Sith world Exegol.
In his last attempt to reclaim the galaxy, Sidious unveils the Final Order fleet, a massive fleet of Xyston-class Star Destroyers capable of planetary destruction.
He offers the fleet to Kylo Ren in exchange for killing the last remaining Jedi, Rey, who is revealed to be Sidious' granddaughter.
After the death of Kylo's mother, Leia Organa (Carrie Fisher), Kylo returns to the light and reclaims his identity as Ben Solo.
At the end of the film, Ben joins Rey as she confronts Sidious.
Rey channels the power of the past Jedi to destroy Sidious and the Sith, before dying herself.
Ben sacrifices his life to revive Rey and becomes one with the Force.
With peace and justice restored to the galaxy, Rey lives on to start the Jedi Order again.
===
Anthologies and derivative works ===
In a deleted scene from Attack of the Clones, the "Lost Twenty" is the name given to a group of Jedi Masters—numbering twenty in total—who left the Jedi Order throughout its history.
The first 12 of these Lost Twenty became "Dark Jedi" who eventually founded the first Sith Empire.
In the years preceding the Clone Wars, Jedi Master Dooku left the Jedi Order as a result of differences with his fellow Jedi, becoming the 20th Jedi Master in the history of the Order to do so.
To showcase the failures of the Jedi they created statues of the fallen Jedi and placed them in the Jedi Temple Archives.

The animated television series Star Wars: The Clone Wars depicts the battles of the Clone Wars, focusing on the Jedi and clone troopers they lead against the Separatists and its Sith leaders.
The feature-film pilot reveals that Anakin trained an apprentice, Ahsoka Tano, between Attack of the Clones and Revenge of the Sith.
Later arcs explore the foundations of Order 66 and Palpatine's manipulation of the Jedi Order.

The animated television series Star Wars Rebels reveals that Ahsoka and a Jedi named Kanan Jarrus survived the purge; the latter trains a new apprentice, Ezra Bridger.
The series also reveals that, following the start of the purge with Order 66, the Emperor commissioned the Inquisitorius, a group of former Jedi who had turned to the Dark Side for various reasons, to aid Darth Vader in hunting down the remaining Jedi.

The canon video game
Star Wars Jedi:
Fallen Order introduces Cal Kestis, a former Padawan hiding from the Empire who accidentally exposes his Force abilities to aid someone putting him on the Inquisitors' radar.
Kestis gets aid from Cere Junda, another Jedi Knight in hiding.

===
Members ===
The exact size of the pre-purge Jedi's membership and operations are never specified.
However, in the Star Wars Rebels episode "Path of the Jedi", Kanan Jarrus stated: "...
There were around 10,000 Jedi Knights defending the galaxy.
Now, we are few.
But in those days, we had small outposts, temples spread throughout the stars.
The Empire sought out these temples and destroyed many of them..."


====
Yoda ====
Yoda was a wise, experienced, and powerful Grand Master of the Jedi of an unknown species and the oldest known prophet in existence (having lived at least 900 years), considered the wisest and most powerful Jedi Master within the Star Wars universe.
He was knighted at age 100, and spent the next eight centuries mentoring several generations of Jedi, about 20,000 of which he took as Padawans.
During this period, the green Jedi Master formed good relations with the Wookies of Kashyyyk on numerous occasions, such as when he saved their Terentatek.
Following the Galactic Republic's transformation into the Galactic Empire, Yoda was one of the few Jedi survivors of Order 66, and spent the rest of his life on the swamp planet Dagobah.
Hiding from the Empire, he trained Luke Skywalker in the Jedi arts, until dying of old age, though he returned as a Force spirit.
In the sequel trilogy, Yoda appears both as a Force spirit, teaching an older and wiser Luke about failure, and as a disembodied voice alongside other past Jedi, empowering Rey to face a rejuvenated Emperor Palpatine.

==== Mace Windu ====

Mace Windu was a human male Jedi Master of the Order and one of the last members of the Order's upper echelons before the fall of the Galactic Republic.
Born into a tribe of nomads on the Haruun Kal, Windu was offered to Jedi anthropologists as a blessing to regain his people's connection to the Force when he was 6 months old, sometime after his parents died in the bordering jungle.
He was taken as a Padawan by Mirialan Jedi Master Cyslin Myr, and began using a unique talent of seeing "shatterpoints", or faultlines in the Force that could affect the destinies of certain individuals, and indeed the galaxy itself.
Knighted early in his career, the esteemed Windu progressed up the Jedi ranks until reaching his place on the Council, from which he was known as one of the most powerful Jedi and possibly the greatest swordsman of his time.

He first appeared in Star Wars:
Episode I - The Phantom Menace, where he expressed doubt regarding Qui-Gon Jinn's conclusion about Darth Maul being a Sith Lord, but
nonetheless assured the Council that their full resources will be utilized to verify the theory that the Sith could have returned.
Out of all members of the Jedi Council, Windu was the most reluctant to allow young Anakin Skywalker (who Jinn believed to be the prophesied Chosen One), to be trained as a Jedi, believing he was dangerous due to his fragile emotional state.
In Star Wars: Episode II - Attack of the Clones, he led a party of 200 Jedi on a mission to rescue Obi-Wan Kenobi, Anakin Skywalker and Padmé Amidala from Separatist captivity on Geonosis, where he killed the bounty hunter Jango Fett in the battle that followed.
During the Clone Wars, he served the Republic as an overseer of the war effort and advisor to Supreme Chancellor Palpatine, as well as taking part in conflicts such as the Battles of Malastare and Felucia.
Star Wars:
Episode III - Revenge of the Sith, upon being informed by Anakin that Palpatine was the Sith Lord Darth Sidious
, Windu attempted to arrest the Chancellor and beat him in a lightsaber duel, but died after having his arm cut off by Anakin, who subsequently turned to the Dark Side, and being electrocuted with Force Lighting by Palpatine.
In Star Wars: Episode IX -
The Rise of Skywalker, Windu appears as a disembodied voice alongside other past Jedi, empowering Rey to face a rejuvenated Palpatine.

====
Count Dooku ====
Count Dooku of Serenno was a human male Jedi Master who was trained by Yoda and in turn trained Qui-Gon Jinn, and one of the main antagonists of the prequel trilogy.
Born to the royal family of the planet Serenno, Dooku was rejected by his family as an infant upon the discovery of his connection to the Force, which his father in particular feared and, as such, abandoned him after contacting the Jedi Order to come and take him to Coruscant.
During his training under Yoda, Dooku proved himself to be both strong with the Force and a master duelist, regarded by many as one of the best in the Order.
Upon becoming a Jedi Master, he left the Order and returned to Serenno to reclaim his title and heritage as a nobleman.
He later fell to the Dark Side and became the Sith Lord Darth Tyranus, Darth Sidious' second apprentice.
Dooku helped Sidious with his galactic conquest plans, recruiting the bounty hunter Jango Fett as the template of the clone army that would be used by the Galactic Republic, and forming the Confederacy of Independent Systems from various planets and systems that wanted to become independent from the Republic, resulting in the Clone Wars.
Dooku served as the figurehead of the Separatist Alliance throughout the Clone Wars, until meeting his demise at the hands of Anakin Skywalker in Star Wars:
Episode III - Revenge of the Sith, who decapitated him at Chancellor Palpatine's (secretly Darth Sidious) urgings, thus revealing that Sidious never cared about Dooku and merely used him to aid his plans.

====
Qui-Gon Jinn ====
Qui-Gon Jinn was a wise and powerful human male Jedi Master, and the Master of Obi-Wan Kenobi.
Unlike other, more conservative Jedi, he valued living in the moment as the best way to embrace the Force.
While other Jedi respected him highly, they were frequently puzzled by his unorthodox beliefs and ultimately denied him a seat on the Jedi Council, despite him being among the wisest and most powerful of the Jedi.
Jinn was both the Jedi to discover the Sith's return after more than a millennium, upon being attacked by Darth Maul during a mission to protect Queen Padmé Amidala of Naboo, and the one to find the ability of becoming a Force spirit after death, though he wasn't capable of having a physical body.
Following his death at Darth Maul's hands, Jinn guided both Yoda and Obi-Wan to the ability of becoming a physical Force spirit after death.
In Star Wars: Episode IX -
The Rise of Skywalker, he appears as a disembodied voice alongside other past Jedi, empowering Rey to face a rejuvenated Emperor Palpatine.

====
Obi-Wan Kenobi ====
Obi-Wan Kenobi was a human male Jedi Master who trained Anakin Skywalker, at the behest of his deceased master Qui-Gon Jinn, and later his son Luke Skywalker, making him one of the main characters in the Star Wars franchise.
Having fought in the Clone Wars, Obi-Wan proved himself an adept strategist, duelist, and spy, as his leadership style heavily favours subterfuge and misdirection while commanding clone troopers, or wielding the Force.
Due to his charisma and persuasion skills, he became known as 'The Negotiator' during the Clone Wars.
Obi-Wan best exemplifies the Jedi Code: in spite of Darth Vader's betrayal, his master and the woman he loved being killed by his nemesis, Darth Maul, he never fell into darkness.
As one of the few survivors of Order 66 following the Galactic Republic's transformation into the Galactic Empire, Obi-Wan hid on the desert planet Tatooine, watching over Vader's son Luke, knowing that he would one day grow to become a Jedi and defeat Vader.
He briefly mentored Luke in the Jedi arts, before meeting his demise at the hands of his former apprentice aboard the Death Star, though he continued guiding Luke as a Force spirit.
In Star Wars: The Force Awakens, Obi-Wan's voice can briefly be heard just after Rey's force vision when she came into contact with Anakin's lightsaber.
In Star Wars: Episode IX -
The Rise of Skywalker, Obi-Wan appears as a disembodied voice alongside other past Jedi, empowering Rey to face a rejuvenated Emperor Palpatine.

====
Anakin Skywalker ====
Anakin Skywalker was a human male Jedi Knight Master, one of the main protagonists of the prequel trilogy, and the primary antagonist of the original trilogy.
He is the Chosen One, being born of the Force.
He was apprenticed to Obi-Wan Kenobi and proved to be a very gifted duelist and Force user, being appointed to the Jedi High Council at the age of 22.
He secretly married Padmé Amidala at the onset of the Clone Wars and has two children, Luke Skywalker and Leia Organa.
He was eventually seduced to the Dark Side by the Sith Lord, Darth Sidious (Emperor Palpatine) and became Sith Lord, Darth Vader, serving the Galactic Empire.
While he was a member of the Jedi Council, he trained a Padawan of his own, Ahsoka Tano during the Clone Wars.
Vader was eventually redeemed by his son in Return of the Jedi, and gave his own life to save his, killing Palpatine and fulfilling the prophecy of the Chosen One.
In Star Wars: Episode IX -
The Rise of Skywalker, Anakin appears as a disembodied voice alongside other past Jedi, empowering Rey to face a rejuvenated Palpatine.

====
Ahsoka Tano ====
Ahsoka Tano was a Togruta female Jedi Padawan discovered on her homeworld of Shili by Jedi Master Plo Koon.
Plo brought her to Coruscant to train as a Jedi, and she eventually became the Padawan learner of Anakin Skywalker during the Clone Wars.
Among many campaigns, Ahsoka found herself advising rebels on the planet Onderon, including Steela and Saw Gerrera, in their fight against the Confederacy.
These rebels would eventually form part of the basis of the Alliance for the Restoration of the Republic, a relationship that would later prove beneficial to her.
She was later accused of bombing the hangar at the Jedi Temple on Coruscant before clearing her name with Anakin's help.
However, the Jedi Council's response during the ordeal soured her faith in the Order and she left the Order to forge her own path in the galaxy.
She briefly returned in the service of the Republic during the final days of the Clone Wars, when she led part of the 501st Clone Legion in the Siege of Mandalore to capture the former Sith Lord Darth Maul, who attempted to warn her that Anakin would soon fall to the Dark Side.
Shortly after capturing Maul, Ahsoka was betrayed by her clone troopers as part of Order 66, but managed to escape alongside Clone Captain Rex (whose control chip she removed).
Years later, Ahsoka would eventually serve the nascent Rebel Alliance as the spymaster and head of its intelligence network, directing operations behind the codename "Fulcrum".
She is one of the few Jedi to survive past the Galactic Empire era and into the New Republic era.
In Star Wars: Episode IX -
The Rise of Skywalker, Ahsoka appears as a disembodied voice alongside other past Jedi, empowering Rey to face a rejuvenated Emperor Palpatine.

====
Cal Kestis ====
Cal Kestis was a human male Jedi Padawan who trained under Master Jaro Tapal.
After the events of Order 66 and failing to save his master's life, he went into hiding on the planet Bracca where he worked as a scrapyard rigger.
While scrapping a freighter, an accident forced Cal to reveal his Force abilities to save a co-worker, exposing him to the Empire and the Inquisitorius.
On the run, Cal was aided by Cere Junda, a Jedi Knight also in hiding, who became his unofficial mentor.
Cal is the protagonist of Star Wars Jedi: Fallen Order.

====
Cere Junda ====
Cere Junda was a human female Jedi Knight who went into hiding following Order 66.
As a Padawan, Junda was sent with her master Eno Cordova to the planet Ontotho to regulate a dispute between corporate security forces and local freedom fighters.
After an attack separated them, the impulsive Junda fought alongside the freedom fighters to find Cordova.
Following the Clone Wars and the start of the Jedi Purge, Junda secretly sought to rebuild Jedi Order.
After saving him from the Inquisitors, Junda began to mentor former Padawan Cal Kestis.
Prior to the Purge, Junda also mentored a Padawan named Trilla Siduri, who later fell to the Dark Side and became an Inquisitor known as the Second Sister.

====
Kanan Jarrus ====
Kanan Jarrus was a human male Jedi Padawan who fought for the Rebellion during its formation.
First introduced as a main character of the animated television series Star Wars Rebels, Jarrus was known to be the leader of a small rebel cell called the Spectres, operating on the planet Lothal.

As a survivor of Order 66, Jarrus was forced to break certain Jedi traditions to avoid being detected by Imperial forces that continued their mission to eliminate any Jedi on sight, such as eschewing traditional Jedi robes or occasionally using a blaster, a weapon typically shunned by Jedi.

Although he lost his master Depa Bilaba to Order 66 before he could ascend the ranks of the Jedi Order, he was tasked with training the young Force-sensitive Ezra Bridger throughout his eventual service to the larger Rebellion.
He was known as Caleb Dume before Order 66, and changed his name to avoid detection.
Though Jarrus died saving Hera Syndulla, his legacy would live on through their son, Jacen Syndulla.
In Star Wars: Episode IX -
The Rise of Skywalker, he appears as a disembodied voice alongside other past Jedi, empowering Rey to face a rejuvenated Emperor Palpatine.

====
Ezra Bridger ====
Ezra Bridger was a human male Jedi Padawan who was born on the planet Lothal on the same day the Galactic Empire was established.
He witnessed many injustices of the Imperial occupation of his homeworld for much of his childhood and was separated from his parents from a very early age.
He was able to survive alone using street smarts and skills, but was discovered by Kanan Jarrus to have potential Force sensitivity after he encounters the Spectres for the first time.
After discovering how much of a team player he could be during a rescue operation, they recruited Bridger, who began training him in the ways of the Jedi under Jarrus, himself still a Jedi Padawan.

Bridger took a long time learning how to wield a lightsaber and use it to deflect blaster bolts, modifying his first one to fire stun blasts in the interim.

He was not well skilled in lightsaber duels against Inquisitors and Darth Vader, but later discovered his unique ability to use the Force to control and command animals, a skill that proved more useful several times during his service in the Rebellion.
Bridger later went missing in action during the battle to liberate Lothal from Imperial occupation, where he successfully defeated Grand Admiral Thrawn, regarded by many as the Empire's best tactician.

====
Luke Skywalker ====
Luke Skywalker was a human male Jedi Knight (later Master) and the protagonist of the original trilogy.
As the last Padawan of Obi-Wan Kenobi, he became an important figure in the Rebel Alliance's struggle against the Galactic Empire.
Luke was heir to a family deeply rooted in the Force, being the twin brother of Rebellion leader Princess Leia Organa of the planet Alderaan, the son of former Queen of Naboo and Republic Senator Padmé Amidala and Jedi turned Sith Lord Darth Vader (Anakin Skywalker), and the maternal uncle of Ben Solo.
After redeeming his father from the Dark Side of the Force, who died killing his master and the last Sith, Emperor Palpatine / Darth Sidious, in order to save Luke, he set out to train a new generation of Jedi to rebuild the Order, only to have them wiped out by Supreme Leader Snoke, a puppet created by a revived Palpatine, who also turned Ben to the Dark Side, adopting the Kylo Ren persona.
Skywalker then spent the rest of his life in exile on Ahch-To, the original headquarters of the Jedi Order, blaming himself for Ben's turn and the destruction of his Order, until he was found by Rey, the last Jedi and the secret granddaughter of Palpatine, whom he reluctantly trained in the Jedi arts.
Shortly after, he gave his life to distract Kylo Ren, now Supreme Leader of the First Order, on the planet Crait via a Force Projection, allowing the Resistance to escape.
When Rey learned of her lineage and exiled herself on Ahch-To out of fear of turning to the Dark Side, Luke appeared before her as a Force spirit and encouraged her to face Palpatine.
Along with the spirits of other past Jedi, he then empowered Rey during her final confrontation with Palpatine, which marked the definitive defeat of the Sith, and later watched from afar alongside his sister's spirit (who had died redeeming Kylo Ren) as Rey renounced her lineage, becoming a Skywalker instead.

====
Ben Solo ====
Ben Solo was a human male Jedi Padawan and the primary antagonist of the sequel trilogy.
He was the son of smuggler and Rebel Alliance General Han Solo and Rebellion leader Princess Leia Organa, and the nephew of Jedi Master Luke Skywalker, having been born shortly after the Galactic Empire's defeat.
As part of his uncle's new generation of Jedi, Ben trained under him, but was eventually seduced to the Dark Side by Supreme Leader Snoke, a puppet created by a revived Emperor Palpatine / Darth Sidious, the last Sith, and sought to become a Sith Lord, as powerful as his late grandfather, Darth Vader (Anakin Skywalker).
Following the destruction of Luke's New Jedi Order, Ben adopted the Kylo Ren persona and became a commander within the First Order, as well as the leader of the Knights of Ren, an organization of fellow Force-wielders.
He later killed his father when he unsuccessfully tried to redeem him, and formed a unique connection with Rey, the last Jedi and Palpatine's secret granddaughter, called a "dyad in the Force".
After killing Snoke, Ren took over as Supreme Leader of the First Order, until ultimately being redeemed by his mother, who died in the process, and helping Rey face Palpatine, giving his own life to save hers.

====
Rey ====
Rey was a human female Jedi Padawan and the protagonist of the sequel trilogy.
She was the illegitimate granddaughter of Emperor Palpatine / Darth Sidious, the last surviving Sith, and was born in the years following the Galactic Empire's defeat.
Abandoned on the desert planet of Jakku at a young age by her parents in order to keep her safe, she became involved in the conflict between the Resistance and the First Order, and formed a unique connection with Kylo Ren, called a "dyad in the Force".
She was briefly trained by Luke Skywalker and, following his death, continued her Jedi training under the guidance of his sister and Resistance leader Leia Organa, as well as the ancient Jedi texts.
Rey eventually learned of her lineage and, with the help of a redeemed Kylo Ren and the spirits of past Jedi, faced a revived Palpatine, killing him and ending the Sith Order once and for all.
She then renounced her lineage, becoming a Skywalker instead, prepared to find her own path.

=== Force-sensitive organizations ===
Not every "dark side"-user is a Sith; nor is every "light side"-user a Jedi.
Within the Star Wars Expanded Universe, people of all species have demonstrated varying "force-sensitive" powers and abilities.
These "force-wielders" are often depicted with little to no formal Jedi training in the Force, originating from primitive planets.

====
The Sith Organization ====


=====
Dark side adept =====
A dark side adept is someone with the power to use the dark side of the Force outside of the traditions of the Jedi or the Sith.
They were often steeped in the lore of the dark side and opposed to those who used the light side, such as Jedi.
While all Sith were technically dark side adepts, non-Sith individuals such as Asajj Ventress, Kylo Ren, and the Grand Inquisitor were also considered dark side adepts.
Dark side adepts were referenced in passing in James Luceno's canon novel Tarkin.

====
Force-wielders without affiliation ====
Bendu debuted in the Star Wars Rebels Season 3 episode "Steps Into Shadow".
Bendu was a Force-sensitive individual who resided on the remote planet of Atollon and represented the "center" of the Force, between the light side and the dark side.
"
Jedi and Sith wield the Ashla and Bogan.
The light and the dark.
I'm the one in the middle.
The Bendu..." stated Bendu.
He is depicted as one who seeks balance, and has been likened to Tom Bombadil of The Lord of the Rings.
The term "Bendu" first appears in the original script for Star Wars as the name of the Jedi Knights, the "Jedi-Bendu".
Most notably, Anakin Skywalker's padawan Ahsoka Tano left the Jedi Order, and continued to wield the Force, she never affiliated or created any Force sensitive organization.

== Description ==


===
The Jedi Code ===
The Jedi Code was a set of rules that governed the behavior of the Jedi Order.
It taught its followers to not give in to feelings of anger toward other lifeforms, which would help them resist fear and prevent them from falling to the dark side of the Force.

The Code:
There is no emotion, there is peace.

There is no ignorance, there is knowledge.

There is no passion, there is serenity.

There is no chaos, there is harmony.

There is no death, there is the Force.

===
The Four Councils ===
The Four Branches of the Jedi Council are fictional institutions from the Star Wars universe.
They serve the Jedi Order as an organized administrative body that provide the necessary auxiliary and support services that sustain and governed the Order's academies, temples, interests and organizations.

====
Jedi High Council ====
The Jedi High Council is the main ecclesiastical leadership of the Jedi Order.
The Jedi High Council is made up of some of the strongest, wisest and most experienced members of the Jedi Order.
They are elected to lead the Jedi.
The Jedi High Council has twelve members at any given time: five members who serve for life, four members who serve long-term, and three limited-term members.
Sifo-Dyas had a seat on the Council until his extremist views on a war that he foresaw caused his removal.
Other older members include Jor Aerith, Tera Sinuba, and Yula Braylon.

In Jedi: Fallen Order: Dark Temple (which is set an unknown amount of time before The Phantom Menace), the Jedi Council includes Yoda, Mace Windu, Eeth Koth, Yarael Poof, Poli Dapatian, and Jocasta Nu.
In Master & Apprentice, set seven years before The Phantom Menace and after the events of Dark Temple, the council includes Yoda, Mace Windu, Depa Billaba, Poli Dapatian (who is in the process of retiring), Eeth Koth, and Saesee Tiin.

Members of the Jedi High CouncilThe final roster of the Jedi High Council before the Order fell was:


====
Council of First Knowledge ====
The Council of First Knowledge administered the Temple-based academy and its curriculum, and funded scholars' scientific research.
To this end, the Council guarded and maintained the Temple Archives and its holocron vaults, as well as the "Shadow program" at the Jedi Temple:
Jedi Sentinels tasked with hunting down Sith artifacts.

====
Council of Reconciliation ====
The Council of Reconciliation dealt with the Galactic Senate and the Republic Diplomatic Corps in order to help bring diplomatic resolutions to conflicts and end political standoffs.
The "first face" of the Republic presented to worlds interested in joining the Republic, this Council would dispatch Jedi diplomats and ambassadors to moderate debate and hammer out treaties


====
Council of Reassignment ====
The Council of Reassignment administered the Jedi Service Corps and each of its branch councils.
Organizing work for those Initiates who failed out of the academy and Knights with special talents, the Reassignment Council oversaw this branch's missions and assignments.

===
Ranks of authority and educational progress ===
Every Jedi, regardless of species or world, is trained for their career at Jedi Academy.
Entrance is determined by rigorous examination and psychological tests.
When Jedi Sentinels discover or test a suitable "force-sensitive" candidate, they are taken to the Jedi Academy at the age of 5 (depending on the species and arbitrary years) with the parent's permission.
Jedi scholarship educations are considered prestigious, as most parents are portrayed as either happy or proud of the opportunity presented to their child, who could never afford an education.
However, parents also are generally sad since they know they are unlikely to see their child again before adulthood.
Members of the Order progress through four educational stages, at times referred to as levels:


====
Initiate ====
Initiation is the first part of Jedi training; they are mentored by Jedi Masters in rudimentary control over the Force and basic self-defense techniques.

Most Initiates were typically Younglings (a child Jedi-in-training), receiving early and first-class education.
The first ten years of a youngling's training demands segregation from outside distractions and is deliberately designed to reinforce detachment from earthly emotions, including loyalty or love for their parents.
This is why Yoda initially denied both Anakin and Luke Skywalker for being "too old for training".

Release all your earthly attachments; let go all you've grown to love...
Surrender yourself.

Younglings were portrayed training under Jedi Master Yoda in a scene on Attack of the Clones and hiding during the assault on the Jedi Temple in Revenge of the Sith.

The “Young Jedi” story arc and the episode “Path of the Jedi”  explored the Jedi tradition called "The Gathering," where initiates traveled to the "Crystal Caves" to harvest kyber crystals, which they would use to build their first lightsabers.
Crystals were attuned to individual Jedi and lacked color.
The Force spoke to each of the younglings through their crystals.
To find their crystal, each initiate had to learn a lesson: courage, hope, patience, trust, confidence, and selflessness.

====
Padawan ====
An Initiate who successfully completes "fundamental training" is given a second-class education and then undergoes Padawan training under the tutelage of a Mentor (usually a Jedi Knight or Jedi Master).
They are also called "Apprentices" and "Padawan learners".
As a rite of passage and the final test before the trials to knighthood, Padawans must build their own lightsabers.
In the Old Republic, Padawans usually wore a hair braid on the right side of their head which was removed with a lightsaber upon attaining knighthood.
They also served as Commanders in the Clone Wars.

====
Knight ====
Disciplined and experienced, Jedi Knights become so only when they have completed "the trials" (final tests), they officially graduate, being eligible for specialized advance courses, and may continue to pursue a third-class education (see below) to obtain the equivalent of a habilitation or post-doctoral degree.
As the most common rank, it is interchangeably referred to as "Jedi", "Jedi Knight" and "Master Jedi" (although the latter are honorifics used only by Younglings and Padawans when addressing Jedi Knights or above).

The five tests are usually known as Trial of Skill, the Trial of Courage, the Trial of the Flesh, the Trial of Spirit, and the Trial of Insight (or Knowledge).
In Return of the Jedi, Master Yoda gives his apprentice, Luke Skywalker, the trial of confronting Darth Vader for a second time so he might become a full-fledged Knight.
Occasionally, performing an extraordinary (usually heroic) act can earn a Padawan learner Jedi status, such as when Obi-Wan Kenobi defeats the Sith Lord, Darth Maul.
By the time of the Skywalker Saga films, distinct "battle classes" were not necessary as the Republic had not seen war in over a thousand years, and the title of Knight was simply a rank once again.

====
Master ====
Jedi Master is a term of respect used by beings who respect the Jedi.
Regarded as among the most accomplished and recognized polymaths in the Star Wars galaxy.
Upon completion of vocational or postgraduate education, a Jedi Knight becomes a Jedi Master after successfully training several Padawan learners to Knight status, such as when Obi-Wan Kenobi became a Jedi Master after he successfully trained Anakin Skywalker to the point where he was able to complete the trials and become a Jedi Knight.
Though this is the most common manner, there are other ways of attaining the rank.

===
Specializations and occupations ===
Various careers, occupations, ranks and titles were available to all Jedi.
Upon a Padawan's ascension to "Knighthood-status", a Jedi pursued higher education or vocational education and training in a field of expertise; choose a careers based on preference, personal talents and skills.
Before the Great Jedi Purge, numerous divisions existed across the whole of the order, but most personnel are represented within the three order divisions: the Order of the Guardian, the Order of the Consular, or Order of the Sentinel.

In addition to their specialization, in times of war, the High Council could demand that the members of the Order assume military ranks in order to defend the Republic.

====
Hierarchy ====
Grand Master of the Jedi:
The Grand Master is usually the oldest, most experienced and best trained of all Jedi.
A Grand Master is voted unanimously by the Jedi High Council.
The Grand Master dictates the organization's general policies while providing direction and guidance to the entire Jedi Order.
Yoda and Luke Skywalker were Jedi Grandmasters.

Chief Master of the High Council (or 'Master of the Order'):
The Chief Master of the High Council is elected by the Jedi High Council, which effectively acts as chairman and chief operating officer.
Its chief responsibilities include; presiding over High Council meetings of the assembled group, conducts Jedi businesses in an orderly fashion, managing the particulars of the day-to-day administration of the Jedi Order, act as representative or spokesperson to the Galactic Senate, and serving as the Grand Master's junior partner.
It is believed that Jedi Master Mace Windu filled this position at the time of the Clone Wars.

Chief Librarian of the Archives:
The overseer of the Jedi Archives, Holocron Vault, Librarian's Assembly and the Educational Corps.
Second only to the Grand Master in administrative importance, the Chief Librarian worked closely with the Council of First Knowledge.
Around the time of the Clone Wars, the Chief Librarian was the elderly Jedi Master Jocasta Nu.

Jedi General:
A title given to those given commanding roles in the Grand Army of the Republic during the Clone Wars.

Jedi Commander:
This title was given to Jedi Padawans under the leadership of Jedi Knights and Jedi Masters with their roles as Jedi Generals in the Grand Army of the Republic during the Clone Wars.

==== Divisions ====
Jedi Guardian:
Jedi Guardians focused all aspects of combat as an extension of their being, and trained on combining and perfecting their athletic, aviation and martial art skills with mastery of the Force.
The Force skills studied by the Guardians were typically those used for quickly disabling an opponent and aiding in agility and stamina.
Many were stationed within Republic planetary or sectoral government's security agencies where they worked as special peacekeepers and law enforcement agents, helping to quell riots and capture terrorists.
The highest ranking Jedi Guardians were stationed at the Jedi academies as instructors tasked with passing down their experience to the young students of the Order.
Those Jedi who mastered lightsaber-combat techniques (such as Mace Windu) were dubbed Weapon Masters and were among the greatest warriors of the Order.

Jedi Consular:
Jedi Consulars focused on further mastery of the Force and the sharpening of mental faculties, and wielded a lightsaber only for self-defense.
Overseen by the Council of Reconciliation, Jedi Consulars were often called upon to act as impartial advisers, diplomats, and historians.
Most Consulars specialized as historians, archivists, librarians, archaeologists, geologists, biologists, mathematicians, and astronomers; they contributed to the growth and preservation of the Jedi Archives as "Lore Keepers" directed by the Librarian's Assembly.
Some Consulars worked closely with the Republic bureaucrats to assist in greeting unaligned governments and helping them join the Republic and given the authority to hammer out a compromise or treaty during tense negotiations, backed by the full support of the Senate and Jedi Order.
Some Consulars joined the Circle of Jedi Healers (headquartered out of the Coruscant Temple's Halls of Healing) and focused on the medical and humanitarian aspects of the Force, manipulating the Living Force to perform the art of healing.
Those Jedi specifically predisposed to receive visions through the Force were known as "Seers", maintaining and updating the Order's holocrons; the most perceptive of these Jedi (such as Yoda) were known as Prophets and foretold the future of the galaxy.

Jedi Sentinel:
Jedi Sentinels focused on diverse disciplines, applying their force abilities as engineers, technicians, intelligence and security experts.
Most Sentinels were stationed at numerous locations for decades, to serve as liaison officers between the system or sector and the Republic.
The anonymous "Jedi Temple Guard" Sentinels were charged with guarding the Jedi Temple.
Some Sentinels aided police as detectives through the use of the Force.
Since Republic law required all newborns undergo "Force-sensitivity" testing, Sentinels who worked as members of the Acquisition Division of the Order routinely tracked down and identified Force-sensitive children to assess whether they met the qualifications to receive training in the Jedi Order.
The most elite Sentinels became "Shadows" or "Watchmen": the Jedi-secret police who worked under the supervision of the First Knowledge Council to destroy all remnants of the Sith.

=== Resources and technology ===
Within the Star Wars universe, the Jedi are usually portrayed wearing simple robes and carrying specialized field gear for their missions.
Their philosophical lifestyles mirror those of real-world religious vows and evangelical counsels, as their personal possessions are provided exclusively by the Jedi Order, and are only meant to allow self-sufficiency.

====
Weapons ====
The most notable instrument wielded by a Jedi is the lightsaber.
Both Jedi and Sith use lightsabers, though the former regard them as a tool, the latter, a weapon.
The Jedi's lightsabers emit cool colors, usually blue or green blades (sometimes yellow, or purple, as seen in the case of Mace Windu), while the Sith emit warm colors (red).
Lightsabers can be of many different colors depending on the crystal fixture.

Most Jedi use naturally formed crystals, whereas Sith tend to use synthetic crystals, which are usually red in color.

Although rare, multi-bladed lightsabers can exist, especially among Sith such as Darth Maul's double bladed lightsaber, the Inqusitors' double-bladed/rotating ones, or Kylo Ren's crossguard-bladed one (due to a cracked kyber crystal).

====
Vehicles ====
Eta-2 Actis Jedi Interceptors first appeared in Revenge of the Sith.
Delta-7B
Aethersprite Jedi starfighters appear in Star Wars:
Episode II – Attack of the Clones and Star Wars: Episode III – Revenge of the Sith.
In Attack of the Clones, Obi-Wan Kenobi travels via Jedi starfighter to Kamino to investigate the attempted assassination of Padmé Amidala; he also flies a Jedi starfighter to Geonosis in an attempt to track down the bounty hunter Jango Fett.
Lacking a hyperdrive, the starfighter relies on an external sled to propel it through hyperspace.
Kenobi and Anakin Skywalker (Hayden Christensen) fly updated Jedi starfighters (called Jedi Interceptors) in the opening sequence of Revenge of the Sith.
Later, Plo Koon (Matt Sloan) flies a Revenge of the Sith-era starfighter when he is shot down by clone troopers carrying out Emperor Palpatine's
(Ian McDiarmid) Order 66.The Jedi starfighter's triangular shape in Attack of the Clones stems from the shape of Imperial Star Destroyers in the original Star Wars trilogy.
Industrial Light & Magic designer Doug Chiang identified the Jedi starfighter as one of the first designs that bridges the aesthetic between the prequel and original trilogies.
Chiang noted that viewers' familiarity with the Star Destroyer's appearance and Imperial affiliation gives added symbolism to the Jedi craft's appearance and foreshadows the Empire's rise to power.
The starfighter seen in Revenge of the Sith is a cross between the previous film's vessel and the Empire's TIE fighters from the original trilogy.
Hasbro's expanding wings in the Attack of the Clones Jedi starfighter toy inspired the opening wings in the Revenge of the Sith vessel.
The starfighter in the Revenge of the Sith is called a Jedi Interceptor Starfighter.

====
Jedi Archives ====
The Jedi Archives, known as The Great Library of Ossus or The Great Library of the Jedi, contained the galaxy's most priceless and ancient of texts sacred to Jedi scholars and archaeologists.
Among these were Sith artifacts, considered by the Jedi Order to be the most dangerous artifacts in the galaxy, that were accessible only to those able to control the Dark Side of the Force.
The Jedi archives of the Jedi Temple in the movie
Star Wars:
Episode II – Attack of the Clones bear a startling resemblance to the Long Room of the Trinity College Library in Dublin.
This resemblance resulted in controversy as permission had not been sought to use the building's likeness in the film.
However, Lucasfilm denied that the Long Room was the basis for the Jedi archives, and officials from Trinity College Library decided not to take any legal action.

====
Jedi Academy ====
The Jedi academies were established to train Force-sensitive beings accepted into the Jedi Order in the ways of the Force.
Overseen by the Council of First Knowledge, each academy was governed by an advisory Council appointed by their superiors on Coruscant.
Mainstreaming the majority of teachings at the Temple, certain practices were permitted to vary from world to world.
However, at all sanctioned academies, a group of Jedi Masters would instruct Initiates to the Order in the ways of the Force.
The size of the school varied from world to world; the smallest consisted of a single clan of younglings, and the largest was the main academy housed within the Jedi Temple of Coruscant.
Most academies had been established during the Old Sith Wars and were located in the Galactic Rim.
Some were located on or near Force-wellsprings or places significant to the Order like crystal caves or nexuses of dark side energies that needed constant monitoring.
In addition to the traditional academies established by the Order, the Exploration Corps maintained several spacefaring mobile academies such as the Chu'unthor
so that roaming the galaxy and exploring new worlds could be achieved while still teaching traditional doctrine.
By the fall of the Galactic Republic in 19 BBY, many of the ancient academies had been shut down for decades, with the Council of First Knowledge preferring the central teachings of the Coruscant Temple.
After the dissolution of the Order during the Great Jedi Purge, all orthodox Temples and academies were routed and burned in order to prevent any more Jedi from learning the secrets of the Force.
However, the Galactic Empire's chokehold on Force-education did not last and the Order was reformed following the conclusion of the Galactic Civil War.
After Grand Master Luke Skywalker's New Order became a single class of twelve students including his nephew Ben Solo, it was reduced to only himself when his nephew turned to the darkside and became Kylo Ren.

====
Jedi Temple ====
In the prequel trilogy, the primary Jedi Temple is located on the Republic's capital planet of Coruscant.
As the chief administrative headquarters, the Temple served the Order in three capacities: a monastery and library for the Jedi seeking enlightenment and to reflect on the will of the Force; an academy and training center for Jedi younglings and Padawans who endeavored to join the ranks of the Jedi Knights; and government, in which the Masters of the Jedi High Council guided the Order's direction.
It was originally built atop an old "dark-side nexus" shrine during the birth of the Republic, so as to be symbolic to the Coruscant people that the tyrannical rule of the Sith was over.
In Revenge of the Sith, the Jedi Temple is attacked by clone troopers of the 501st Legion, led by the newly christened Darth Vader, who butchered the Jedi within and set the Temple alight.
After the fall of the Jedi Order and the Galactic Republic, the Temple became the Palace of the Emperor and a location for his dark side artifacts.
It would serve as Sidious' residence for over two decades until his death at the Battle of Endor.
The Temple is visible in the celebrations on Coruscant at the end of Return of the Jedi.
After the destruction of the Sith, Luke Skywalker—the last of the Jedi—recovered fragments of a Force-sensitive tree that was once located at the heart of the Jedi Temple.
Architects' Journal rated the temple third on its top-ten architecture of Star Wars list behind the second Death Star and Jabba the Hutt’s palace on Tatooine, and ahead of Coruscant, the capital city of the Old Republic.
The temple is described in the article as adapting "the robust typology of Mayan temples, with durasteel cladding specified for the external stone walls for improved defensive strength" and said to be a ziggurat that "is built above a Force-nexus and has ample room for training facilities, accommodation and the Jedi Archive.
"
The temple has five towers, the tallest is Tranquility Spire, that are stylistically similar to the minarets surrounding the Hagia Sophia in Istanbul.
Star Wars Insider listed it as the one hundredth greatest thing about Star Wars in its one hundredth issue special.

==
Legends depiction of the Jedi ==
With the 2012 acquisition of Lucasfilm by The Walt Disney Company, most of the licensed Star Wars novels and comics produced since the originating 1977 film Star Wars were rebranded as Star Wars Legends and declared non-canon to the franchise in April 2014.

===
Je'daii ===
The Je'daii Order, precursors to the modern Jedi, studied and used both the light and dark sides of the Force equally.
The preview issue of Dawn of the Jedi states that the Je'daii originated ten thousand years before the saga takes place (approximately 36,453 years BBY).
They were more monk than warrior, and their capital was Tython in the Deep Core.
===
The New Jedi Order ===
In novels set after the events of the film series, Luke Skywalker re-established the Jedi High Council as part of his New Jedi Order.
The most notable difference between the format of the new council and the old is that only half of the council are made up of Jedi, while the other half consisted of politicians.
Following the war with the Yuuzhan Vong, the Jedi withdrew their support from any one political entity and relocated to Ossus, where Luke had a full Jedi Council re-established.

In novels set after the events of the original film trilogy, the New Jedi Order was the restored and reformed Jedi organization, in the wake of the Great Jedi Purge and subsequent fall of the Galactic Empire.
The Jedi Knights, reduced in number to only a handful, were slowly restored, primarily under the leadership of Grandmaster Luke Skywalker.
Skywalker abolished the traditional Master/Padawan system.
He believed all Jedi should be both teachers and students; that they should both learn from and mentor each other, and not just from one Master.

Within the Expanded Universe, The New Jedi Order indicates that the Jedi Temple on Coruscant is no longer standing but it is rebuilt as a gift to Jedi for their services and achievements during the Yuuzhan Vong invasion.
The new temple is in the form of a massive pyramid made from stone and transparisteel that is designed to fit into the new look of Coruscant, though internally it is identical to the design seen in Revenge of the Sith.

==
Cultural impact and critical response ==
The United States Army had a group of officers in the early 1980s who promoted maneuver warfare tactics, and who were derisively referred to as Jedi by more conventional officers who were satisfied with attrition warfare tactics and methods.

===
Analysis ===
In Star Wars and Philosophy, William Stephens compares the Jedi to Stoicism:
To recap, the virtues the Jedi shares with the Stoic sage are patience, timeliness, deep commitment, seriousness (as opposed to frivolity), calmness (as opposed to anger or euphoria), peacefulness (as opposed to aggression), caution (as opposed to recklessness), benevolence (as opposed to hatred), joy (as opposed to sullenness), passivity (as opposed to agitation), and wisdom.
Given all these virtues, Yoda certainly resembles what the ancient Stoics described as the sage—the ideal person who has perfected his reason and achieved complete wisdom.

Functionally, the Jedi order resembles a Praetorian Guard.

===
Media ===
Jedi have made their way into certain areas of pop culture, such as "Weird Al" Yankovic's song "
The Saga Begins", a parody of "American Pie".
In the film
The Men Who Stare at Goats (2009), a reporter follows a former soldier who claimed to be a "Jedi warrior", a nickname for psychic spies in the US military.

===
Religion ===
One of the enduring influences the Star Wars saga has had in popular culture is the idea of the fictional Jedi values being interpreted as a modern philosophical path or religion, spawning various movements such as the Jediism (religious) and the Jedi census phenomenon.

==
See also ==
Sith
Jediism


== Notes ==


==
References ==


===
Citations ===


===
Sources ===
Wallace, Daniel (2017)
[2010].
The Jedi Path:
A Manual for Students of the Force.
San Francisco, CA:
Chronicle Books.
ISBN 978-1-4521-0227-6.
OCLC 752590192.

==
Further reading ==
Sword Fighting in the Star Wars Universe:
Historical Origins, Style and Philosophy by Nick Jamilla (McFarland & Company, 2008)
Star Wars and History by Nancy Reagin & Janice Liedl
(John Wiley & Sons, 2012)
The Science Fiction Reboot: Canon, Innovation and Fandom in Refashioned Franchises by Heather Urbanski (McFarland & Company, 2013)
Star wars: the essential chronology by Kevin J. Anderson & Daniel Wallace (Ballantine Books, 2000)
Culture, identities, and technology in the Star wars films: essays on the two trilogies by Carl Silvio & Tony M. Vinci (McFarland & Company, 2007)
The Star Wars Heresies by Paul F. McDonald (McFarland & Company, 2013)


==
External links ==
The Jedi Order in the StarWars.com Databank
Jedi Temple in the StarWars.com Databank
Jedi on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
The Millennium Falcon is a fictional starship in the Star Wars franchise.
Designed by Joe Johnston for the movie Star Wars (1977), it has subsequently appeared in The Star Wars Holiday Special (1978), The Empire Strikes Back (1980), Return of the Jedi (1983), The Force Awakens (2015),
The Last Jedi (2017)
, Solo:
A Star Wars Story (2018), and The Rise of Skywalker (2019).
The starship, or a similar one, also has a cameo in Revenge of the Sith (2005).
Additionally, the Falcon appears in a variety of Star Wars expanded universe materials, including books, comics, and games;
James Luceno's novel Millennium Falcon focuses on the titular ship.
It also appears in the 2014 animated film The Lego Movie in Lego form, with Billy Dee Williams and Anthony Daniels reprising their roles of Lando Calrissian and C-3PO, and Keith Ferguson voicing Han Solo.

Solo:
A Star Wars Story depicts the YT-1300 Corellian light freighter being embodied by L3-37
(Phoebe Waller-Bridge).
The ship is primarily commanded by smuggler Han Solo (Harrison Ford and Alden Ehrenreich) and his Wookiee first mate, Chewbacca (Peter Mayhew and Joonas Suotamo), and was previously owned by gambler con-artist Lando Calrissian (Billy Dee Williams and Donald Glover).
Described as being one of the fastest vessels in the Star Wars canon, the Falcon looks like a worn-out junker, but despite its humble origins and shabby exterior, the Millennium Falcon has played a critical role in some of the greatest victories of the Rebel Alliance and the New Republic.
==
Origin and design ==
The ship originally had a more elongated appearance, but this design's similarity to the Eagle Transporters in Space: 1999 prompted Lucas to change the Falcon's design.
The original model was modified, re-scaled, and used as Princess Leia's ship, Tantive IV.
Modelmaker Joe Johnston had about four weeks to redesign the Falcon, and Lucas' only suggestion to Johnston was to "think of a flying saucer".
Johnston did not want to produce a "basic flying saucer", so he created the offset cockpit, forward cargo mandibles, and rear slot for the engines.
It was also said that the shape of the ship was roughly based on a hamburger with an olive-on-the-side cockpit.
The design was simple enough to create in the four-week window.
Johnston called production of the new Falcon design one of his most intense projects.
The sound of the ship traveling through hyperspace comes from two tracks of the engine noise of a McDonnell Douglas DC-9, with one track slightly out of synchronization with the other to introduce a phasing effect.
To this, sound designer Ben Burtt added the hum of the cooling fans on the motion-control rig at Industrial Light & Magic (ILM).
===
Models and sets ===
Visually, the Millennium Falcon was represented by several models and external and internal sets.
For Star Wars, a partial exterior set was constructed and the set dressed as Mos Eisley's Docking Bay 94 and the Death Star hangar.
Besides the functional landing gear, an additional support held up the structure and was disguised as a fuel line.
The interior set included the starboard ring corridor, the boarding ramp, cockpit access tunnel, gun turret ladder, secret compartments, and the forward hold.
The cockpit was constructed as a separate set that could be rocked when the ship was supposed to shake.
Several inconsistencies exist between the internal set and the external set, the cockpit access tunnel angle being the most noticeable.

The effects models for Star Wars matched the design of the exterior set.
The primary model was five feet long and detailed with various kit parts.
The ship was represented by a matte painting when Princess Leia (Carrie Fisher) sees it for the first time, showing the full upper surface.
For the 1997 "Special Edition", a digital model replaces the effects model in several shots, and is used in a new shot of the Falcon lifting off from Docking Bay 94.For
The Empire Strikes Back, a new external set was constructed.
In spring 1979, Marcon Fabrications, a heavy engineering firm that served the UK's petrochemical and oil industries, was hired to build a movable full-scale external model capable of "moving as if it were about to take off.
"
Built in secrecy under the project code name Magic Roundabout, the company leased the 1930s Western Sunderland Flying Boat hangar in Pembroke Dock, West Wales.
The model, which took three months to construct, weighed over 25 long tons (25 t), measured 65 feet (20 m) in diameter and 20 feet (6.1 m) high, and used compressed air hover pads for up to 1.5 inches (38 mm) of hover-height movement around the set.
It was then disassembled and shipped to Elstree Studios, Hertfordshire, for filming.
Today, the Pembroke Dock museum has an exhibit about the project.
Along with the full-size mock-up of the Falcon, a new miniature model was created for Star Wars:
Episode V –
The Empire Strikes Back to allow ILM to film more intricate in-flight rolls and pitches that were not possible with the five-foot model.
This model was able to be mounted on a gimbal that allowed ILM to simulate very difficult maneuvers as the ship attempted to outrun Imperial TIE fighters during the asteroid-field-escape scene from the film.
The new model, which measured at approximately 32 inches in length, had several surface features that differed from the five-foot model including updated landing gear and different surface greebles.
The 32" model was the version of the Millennium Falcon most depicted in toys, model kits, and promotional materials for the Star Wars universe prior to the release of The Force Awakens.
The model was reused for Star Wars: Episode VI – Return of the Jedi.
At the end of this production, the model was destroyed.
As in Star Wars, the location set was changed around the ship set.
The only major design change was to add landing gear where the disguised fuel line had been in Star Wars.
As this set included the port side, that gave the set seven landing gears.
The internal set was slightly refitted from A New Hope and featured a sliding cockpit door, a larger cargo hold, an additional corridor to port, and an equipment room.
The cockpit was rebuilt slightly larger to allow more actors to fit comfortably; shots were apparently slightly cropped in later releases of the film to hide this alteration.
Two new interior sets were created that are not shown to connect to the rest of the set: a top hatch that Lando Calrissian (Billy Dee Williams) uses to rescue Luke Skywalker (Mark Hamill), and the compartment where Luke rests on a bunk.

The 5-foot-long (1.5 m) effects model from Star Wars was modified to reflect the additional landing gear, and several new models were built, including one roughly the size of a U.S. Quarter Dollar.
For the 1997 Special Edition, a CGI model replaced the effects model during the approach and landing on Cloud City.

No new models or sets were created for Return of the Jedi.
A portion of the full-scale ship was used for a scene cut from the film in which several characters board the Falcon in a sandstorm on Tatooine.
In the scene when Han exacts a promise from Lando not to damage the Falcon, the Falcon is represented by a backdrop painting.
It is also in a matte painting of the entire hangar bay.

The internal and external sets were scrapped after filming on Return of the Jedi ended.
The effects models were kept by Lucasfilm and some have been on display from time to time.

A digital version of the Falcon appears briefly on Coruscant in Revenge of the Sith (2005).
Lucas has confirmed that the ship is the Falcon and not another ship of similar design.
A CGI version of the vessel also appears in the Disney attraction Star Tours: The Adventures Continue.

On June 3, 2014, TMZ confirmed that the Falcon would return for Star Wars:
The Force Awakens when it leaked a photo from the set of the film, showing a full-scale version of the Falcon being built.
An effects shot of the Falcon appears in the teaser trailer for The Force Awakens, released on November 28, 2014.
This version of the ship is a digital recreation of the original 1977 five-foot model, with additional detailing reflecting the passage of time.
The most noticeable change is the rectangular sensor array above the top hull, which replaces the circular dish from the first three films.

== Depiction ==
“You came in that thing?
You’re braver than I thought.”

Han Solo won the Millennium Falcon from Lando Calrissian in the card game 'sabacc' several years before the events of the film A New Hope.
In Star Wars, Obi-Wan Kenobi (Alec Guinness) and Luke Skywalker
(Mark Hamill) charter the ship in the Mos Eisley cantina to deliver them, C-3PO (Anthony Daniels), R2-D2 (Kenny Baker), and the stolen Death Star
plans to Alderaan.
When the Falcon is captured by the Death Star, the group conceal themselves in smuggling compartments built into the floor to avoid detection during a search of the ship.
Solo later collects his fee for delivering them to the hidden Rebel base and departs under bitter circumstances, but returns to assist Luke in destroying the Death Star.

Solo pilots the Falcon, with Chewbacca, Leia, and C-3PO aboard, to elude the Imperial Starfleet in The Empire Strikes Back, wherein they take refuge at Cloud City, where Darth Vader (David Prowse/James Earl Jones) captures Solo.
Lando Calrissian helps the others escape and, at the film's end, he departs in the Falcon to track down Solo and his captor, Jabba the Hutt.
Calrissian again captains the Falcon during the climax of Return of the Jedi, with Nien Nunb as co-pilot, to destroy the second Death Star.
Before the second Death Star is destroyed, Lando accidentally damages the ship by hitting the circular sensor rectenna dish on a random pipe or circuit in the second Death Star.
Lando and the others still have success in destroying the Galactic Empire.

In Star Wars: The Force Awakens, set some 30 years after Return of the Jedi, the Falcon is in the possession of a scrap dealer named Unkar Plutt on the desert planet Jakku, having been stolen from Solo and Chewbacca some years prior.
Scavenger Rey (Daisy Ridley) and former stormtrooper Finn (John Boyega) steal the Falcon in order to escape from an attack by the First Order, having been targeted for having the droid BB-8 in their possession.
They are captured by a smuggling freighter, which turns out to be piloted by Solo and Chewbacca, who reclaim the Falcon.
Forced to escape in the Falcon from an ambush by parties to whom Solo is heavily in debt, Solo reluctantly agrees to help Rey and Finn return BB-8 to the Resistance.
After Rey is captured by the First Order, Solo agrees to take Finn in the Falcon to the First Order's new Starkiller Base—a planet that has been converted into the next generation of 'Death Star'—by attempting a risky maneuver of bypassing the planet's defences by exiting hyperspace in its atmosphere.
When Solo is killed by his son, the rebels escape the destructing Starkiller Base.
Later, Rey uses a newly-assembled map to travel to Ahch-To, the site of the first Jedi temple, to make contact with the long-lost Luke Skywalker, travelling in the Falcon in the company of Chewbacca and R2-D2.

The Falcon appears again in Star Wars: The Last Jedi, still on
Ahch-To with Rey and Chewbacca.
Later in the film, Chewbacca and Rey take the Falcon to the planet Crait, where the Resistance is under attack by the First Order.
The Falcon loses its sensor dish for the third time on Crait, after it is shot off by a TIE fighter, but still manages to single-handedly take out most of the First Order's fighters on the planet while Luke distracts Kylo Ren.
After the battle, surviving Resistance personnel leave Crait aboard the Falcon.

In The Last Jedi, Rey uses the Falcon's escape pod to board Supreme Leader Snoke's ship.
Director Rian Johnson noted that he wanted its design to resemble a coffin, inspired by C.S. Lewis' Perelandra.
The escape pod was monogrammed to say "Property of Han Solo".
In the film Solo: A Star Wars Story, it is revealed that Lando modified the Falcon by putting an escape pod between the frontal 'mandibles', which Han jettisons to escape a gravity well.

===
Kessel Run ===
“Fast ship?
You've never heard of the Millennium Falcon?
It's the ship that made the Kessel Run in less than twelve parsecs.
I've outrun Imperial starships.
Not the local bulk cruisers mind you, I'm talking about the big Corellian ships now...
She'll make point
five past lightspeed.
She may not look like much, but she's got it where it counts, kid.
I've made a lot of special modifications myself.”

In the initial film, Solo brags that the Falcon "made the Kessel Run in less than twelve parsecs".
As the parsec is a unit of distance, not time, different explanations have been provided.
In the fourth draft of the script, Kenobi "reacts to Solo's stupid attempt to impress them with obvious misinformation."
Lucas acknowledged the misnomer in 1977, saying that Han modified "the navigational system to get through hyperspace in the shortest possible distance".
On the film's DVD audio commentary, Lucas further explained that in the Star Wars universe, traveling through hyperspace requires careful navigation to avoid stars, planets, asteroids, and other obstacles, and that is because no long-distance journey can be made in a straight line, the "fastest" ship is the one that can plot the "most direct course", thereby traveling the least distance.
In The Force Awakens, Rey references the Kessel Run but describes it as being completed in fourteen parsecs, after which Solo corrects her.

In Solo: A Star Wars Story, Solo's Kessel Run is depicted in detail, providing an explanation for the "twelve parsec" boast.
Solo has to make many calculated jumps to avoid killing the crew.
After integrating the memory module of Lando's damaged L3 droid into the ship's navigation, Solo is able to take a "shortcut" (which is dangerously close to a black hole).
Chewbacca indicates the real distance was closer to 13 parsecs, but Solo insists, "Not if you round down," implying that the claim of "less than twelve parsecs" is slightly exaggerated.
===
Ownership ===
The Falcon has been depicted many times in the franchise, and its ownership and command have changed several times.

Prior to Star Wars, the Falcon was in the possession of Lando Calrissian.
He lost it to Han Solo in payment of a gambling debt.

This is depicted in Solo:
A Star Wars Story, as well as the integration of Lando's droid L3-37 with the ship's computer.

After the events of The Empire Strikes Back, Leia, Chewbacca and Lando take possession of the Falcon after Solo's hibernation in carbonite and capture by the Empire and Boba Fett.

During Return of the Jedi, Solo leaves Tatooine aboard the Millennium Falcon, and on arrival at the rendezvous for the Rebel fleet he lends the Falcon to Calrissian, who pilots it during the Battle of Endor and the destruction of the second Death Star.

After the events of Return of the Jedi, the Falcon is stolen from Solo, ending up on the planet Jakku under the ownership of a scrap dealer, Unkar Plutt, 30 years after the Battle of Endor.
In The Force Awakens, Rey and Finn commandeer the ship to escape the planet, only to be found by Solo and Chewbacca, who immediately reclaim the ship.

After the death of Solo, Rey pilots the Falcon, with Chewbacca as her co-pilot.
The novelization of The Force Awakens states that Chewbacca willingly abdicates captaincy of the Falcon to Rey.

After the events of The Last Jedi, the ship becomes the base of operations for the remaining members of the Resistance.

After the events of The Rise of Skywalker the Falcon is again piloted by Lando Calrissian with Chewbacca.

==
Cultural influence ==
Joss Whedon credits the Millennium Falcon as one of his two primary inspirations for his Firefly television show.
The Falcon and the Falcon's distinct shape appear in Star Trek:
First Contact, Blade Runner, Spaceballs, and Starship Troopers.
The manga series Berserk includes a Millennium Falcon arc.
SpaceX states that their launch vehicles (except Starship) are named after the Millennium Falcon.

===
Biology ===
The middle Cambrian arthropod Cambroraster falcatus is named after the Millennium Falcon 


===
Toys ===
Kenner, Hasbro, Steel Tec, Master Replicas, Code 3 Collectibles and Micro Machines have all released Millennium Falcon toys and puzzles, including a Transformers version of the ship.

Hot Wheels has made a model of the ship for their Star Wars starship line and a version of it as a car.
It is also available as a Hot Wheels playset.
Lego has released multiple versions of the Millennium Falcon in varying sizes.
The 5,195-piece Lego model (part of the Star Wars "Ultimate Collectors Series") was physically the largest Lego set sold by the company, until it was topped in 2008 by the Lego Taj Mahal.
In September 2017, Lego released an updated Millennium Falcon set in the Star Wars "Ultimate Collectors Series".

With the new interior and more details compared to the 2007 model, the 7,541-piece model is the most expensive commercially available Lego set.
Lego has also made a version of the Falcon to tie in with the Star Wars film, Solo.
It is called the Kessel Run Millennium Falcon.

==
Theme park attractions ==
On May 31, 2019, a full sized replica of the Falcon was opened to the public along with the rest of Star Wars: Galaxy's Edge at the Disneyland Resort in Anaheim, California, along with a flight simulator attraction,  Millennium Falcon:
Smugglers Run, in which riders take control of the Falcon from inside the iconic cockpit.
An identical version of the attraction opened on August 29, 2019, at Disney's Hollywood Studios at the Walt Disney World Resort in Orlando, Florida.

A third incarnation of the attraction has been announced for Walt Disney Studios Park at the Disneyland Paris Resort in Marne-la-Vallée, France.

== See also ==
List of Star Wars spacecraft


==
References ==
Footnotes
Citations


==
External links ==
Millennium Falcon in the StarWars.com Databank
Star Wars's channel on YouTube — Making of the Millennium Falcon, Millennium Falcon and Asteroids, Tour The Millennium Falcon with Donald Glover
ILMVFX's channel on YouTube - Creating Lando's Millennium Falcon for Solo:
A Star Wars Story, Behind the Magic of the Kessel Run
Millennium Falcon on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Millennium Falcon Notes: information for model builders
How Fast is the Millennium Falcon?:
a thought experiment
Star Wars is an American epic space opera media franchise created by George Lucas, which began with the eponymous 1977 film and quickly became a worldwide pop-culture phenomenon.
The franchise has been expanded into various films and other media, including television series, video games, novels, comic books, theme park attractions, and themed areas, comprising an all-encompassing fictional universe.
In 2020, its total value was estimated at US$70 billion, and it is currently the fifth-highest-grossing media franchise of all time.

The original film (Star Wars), retroactively subtitled Episode IV: A New Hope (1977), was followed by the sequels Episode V:
The Empire Strikes Back (1980) and Episode VI:
Return of the Jedi (1983), forming the original Star Wars trilogy.
Lucas later returned to filmmaking to direct a prequel trilogy, consisting of Episode I: The Phantom Menace (1999), Episode II: Attack of the Clones (2002), and Episode III: Revenge of the Sith (2005).
In 2012, Lucas sold his production company to Disney, relinquishing his ownership of the franchise.
The subsequently produced sequel trilogy consists of Episode VII:
The Force Awakens (2015),
Episode VIII:
The Last Jedi (2017), and Episode IX:
The Rise of Skywalker (2019).

All nine films of the 'Skywalker saga' were nominated for Academy Awards with wins going to the first two releases.
Together with the theatrical live action spin-off films Rogue One (2016) and Solo (2018), the combined box office revenue of the films equated to over US$10 billion and is currently the second-highest-grossing film franchise of all time.

==
Premise ==
The Star Wars franchise depicts the adventures of characters "A long time ago in a galaxy far, far away", in which humans and many species of aliens (often humanoid) co-exist with robots, or 'droids', who may assist them in their daily routines; space travel between planets is common due to lightspeed hyperspace technology.
Spacecraft range from small starfighters, to huge capital ships such as the Star Destroyers, to space stations such as the moon-sized Death Stars.
Telecommunication includes two-way audio and audiovisual screens, and holographic projections.

A mystical power known as the Force is described in the original film as "an energy field created by all living things ...
[that] binds the galaxy together".
Through training and meditation, those whom "the Force is strong with" are able to perform various superpowers (such as telekinesis, precognition, telepathy, and manipulation of physical energy).
The Force is wielded by two major knightly orders at conflict with each other: the Jedi, peacekeepers of the Galactic Republic who act on the light side of the Force through non-attachment and arbitration, and the Sith, who use the dark side by manipulating fear and aggression.
While Jedi Knights can be numerous, the Dark Lords of the Sith (or 'Darths') are intended to be limited to two: a master and their apprentice.
Force-wielders are very limited in numbers in comparison to the average population.
The Jedi and Sith prefer the use of a weapon called a lightsaber, a blade of energy that can cut through virtually any surface and deflect energy bolts.
The rest of the population, as well as renegades and soldiers, use laser-powered blaster firearms.
In the outer reaches of the galaxy, crime syndicates such as the Hutt cartel are dominant.
Bounty hunters are often employed by both gangsters and governments.
Illicit activities include smuggling and slavery.

===
Fictional timeline ===
The Star Wars canon fictional universe spans multiple eras, of which three are focused around each of the film trilogies.
The following eras were defined in January 2021:
The High Republic:
The era of the "High Republic", set 200 years before the prequel trilogy.
It includes the media released in The High Republic and the upcoming The Acolyte.

Fall of the Jedi: The era of the prequel trilogy, in which the democratic Galactic Republic is corrupted by its ruler, Palpatine—secretly the Sith lord Darth Sidious.
After orchestrating the Clone Wars between the Republic and a Separatist confederation, Palpatine exterminates the Jedi Order, overthrows the Republic, and establishes the totalitarian Galactic Empire.
It includes the prequel trilogy films and the animated The Clone Wars.
This era was previously defined as The Age of Republic in August 2019.

Reign of the Empire:
The era after the prequel trilogy, exploring the reign of the Empire.
It includes the animated The Bad Batch and Solo: A Star Wars Story.

The Age of Rebellion:
The era of the original trilogy, in which the Empire is fought by the Rebel Alliance in a Galactic Civil War that spans several years, climaxing with the death of the Emperor and eventually resulting in the fall of the Empire.
It includes the animated Star Wars Rebels, Rogue One, and the original trilogy films.

The New Republic:
The era after the original trilogy, set during the formative years of the New Republic following the fall of the Empire.
It includes The Mandalorian and its spin-off series, The Book of Boba Fett, Rangers of the New Republic, and Ahsoka.

Rise of the First Order:
The era of the sequel trilogy, in which the remnants of the Empire reform as the First Order.
Heroes of the former Rebellion, aided by the New Republic, lead the Resistance against the oppressive regime and its rulers, the mysterious being known as Snoke and his puppet master, the revived Palpatine.
It includes the animated Star Wars Resistance and the sequel trilogy films.
This era was previously defined as The Age of Resistance in August 2019.The
Expanded Universe of spin-off media depicts different levels of continuity, which were deemed non-canonical and rebranded as Legends on April 25, 2014, to make most subsequent works align to the episodic films, The Clone Wars film, and television series.

==
Film ==
The Star Wars film series centers around three sets of trilogies, which are collectively referred to as the "Skywalker saga".
They were produced non-chronologically, with Episodes IV–VI (the original trilogy) being released between 1977 and 1983, Episodes I–III (the prequel trilogy) being released between 1999 and 2005, and Episodes VII–IX (the sequel trilogy), being released between 2015 and 2019.
Each trilogy focuses on a generation of the Force-sensitive Skywalker family.
The original trilogy depicts the heroic development of Luke Skywalker, the prequels tell the backstory of his father Anakin, while the sequels star Luke's nephew, Kylo Ren.

An anthology series set between the main episodes entered development in parallel to the production of the sequel trilogy, described by Disney chief financial officer Jay Rasulo as origin stories.
The first entry, Rogue One (2016), tells the story of the rebels who steal the Death Star plans just before Episode IV.
Solo (2018) focuses on Han Solo's backstory, also featuring original trilogy co-protagonists Chewbacca and Lando Calrissian and involving prequel trilogy villain Darth Maul.

Lucasfilm has a number of Star Wars films in development, two of which were confirmed during Disney Investor Day 2020.
The first will be a film titled Rogue Squadron, which is being directed by Patty Jenkins, and is scheduled for release on December 25, 2023.
The second is an unspecified film from Taika Waititi, who in May 2020 was announced to be directing a Star Wars film
he was co-writing with Krysty Wilson-Cairns.
Additionally, a trilogy independent from the Skywalker saga is being written by The Last Jedi writer/director Rian Johnson.
In September 2019, it was announced that Kathleen Kennedy and Kevin Feige would collaborate to develop a Star Wars film.
In February 2020, a film was announced to be in development from director J. D. Dillard and writer Matt Owens.

===
The Skywalker saga ===


====
Original trilogy ====
In 1971, George Lucas wanted to film an adaptation of the Flash Gordon serial, but could not obtain the rights, so he began developing his own space opera.
After directing American Graffiti (1973), he wrote a two-page synopsis, which 20th Century Fox decided to invest in.
By 1974, he had expanded the story into the first draft of a screenplay.
The 1977 movie's success led Lucas to make it the basis of an elaborate film serial.
With the backstory he created for the sequel, Lucas decided that the series would be a trilogy of trilogies.
Most of the main cast would return for the two additional installments of the original trilogy, which were self-financed by Lucasfilm.

Star Wars was released on May 25, 1977, and first subtitled Episode IV:
A New Hope in the 1979 book The Art of Star Wars.
Episode V:
The Empire Strikes Back was released on May 21, 1980, also achieving wide financial and critical success.
The final film in the trilogy, Episode VI:
Return of the Jedi was released on May 25, 1983.
The story of the original trilogy focuses on Luke Skywalker's quest to become a Jedi, his struggle with the evil Imperial agent Darth Vader, and the struggle of the Rebel Alliance to free the galaxy from the clutches of the Galactic Empire.

====
Prequel
trilogy ====
According to producer Gary Kurtz, loose plans for a prequel trilogy were developed during the outlining of the original two films.
In 1980, Lucas confirmed that he had the nine-film series plotted, but due to the stress of producing the original trilogy, he had decided to cancel further sequels by 1981.
In 1983, Lucas explained that "There was never a script completed that had the entire story as it exists now ...
As the stories unfolded, I would take certain ideas and save them ...
I kept taking out all the good parts, and I just kept telling myself I would make other movies someday.
"Technical
advances in the late 1980s and early 1990s, including the ability to create computer-generated imagery (CGI), inspired Lucas to consider that it might be possible to revisit his saga.
In 1989, Lucas stated that the prequels would be "unbelievably expensive."
In 1992, he acknowledged that he had plans to create the prequel trilogy.
A theatrical rerelease of the original trilogy in 1997 "updated" the 20-year-old films with the style of CGI envisioned for the new trilogy.

Episode
I:
The Phantom Menace was released on May 19, 1999, and Episode II:
Attack of the Clones on May 16, 2002.
Episode III: Revenge of the Sith, the first PG-13 film in the franchise, was released on May 19, 2005.
The first two movies were met with mixed reviews, with the third being received somewhat more positively.
The trilogy begins 32 years before Episode IV and follows the Jedi training of Anakin Skywalker, Luke's father, and his eventual fall from grace and transformation into the Sith lord Darth Vader, as well as the corruption of the Galactic Republic and rise of the Empire led by Darth Sidious.
Together with the original trilogy, Lucas has collectively referred to the first six episodic films of the franchise as "the tragedy of Darth Vader".
====
Sequel
trilogy ====
Prior to releasing the original film, and made possible by its success, Lucas planned "three trilogies of nine films."
He announced this to Time in 1978, and confirmed that he had outlined them in 1981.
At various stages of development, the sequel trilogy was to focus on the rebuilding of the Republic, the return of Luke in a role similar to that of Obi-Wan in the original trilogy, Luke's sister (not yet determined to be Leia), Han, Leia, R2-D2 and C-3PO.
However, after beginning work on the prequel trilogy, Lucas insisted that Star Wars was meant to be a six-part series and that there would be no sequel trilogy.
Lucas decided to leave the franchise in the hands of other filmmakers, announcing in January 2012 that he would make no more Star Wars films.
In October of that year, the Walt Disney Company agreed to buy Lucasfilm and announced that Episode VII would be released in 2015.
The co-chairman of Lucasfilm, Kathleen Kennedy, became president of the company and served as executive producer of new Star Wars feature films.
Lucas provided Kennedy his story treatments for the sequels during the 2012 sale, but in 2015 it was revealed Lucas's sequel outline had been discarded.
The sequel trilogy also meant the end of the existing Star Wars Expanded Universe, which was discarded from canon to give "maximum creative freedom to the filmmakers and also preserve an element of surprise and discovery for the audience.
"Episode
VII:
The Force Awakens was released on December 16, 2015, Episode VIII:
The Last Jedi on December 13, 2017, and Episode IX:
The Rise of Skywalker on December 18, 2019, in many countries.
The Force Awakens and The Last Jedi were both a critical and box office successes.
Episode IX received a mixed reception from critics and audiences.
The sequel trilogy starts 30 years after Episode VI and focuses on the journey of the Force-sensitive orphan Rey, guided by Luke Skywalker.
Along with ex-stormtrooper Finn and ace X-Wing pilot Poe Dameron, Rey helps the Resistance, led by Leia, fight the First Order, commanded by Han and Leia's son (and Luke's nephew), Kylo Ren.
===
Anthology films ===
Lucasfilm and Kennedy have stated that the standalone films would be referred to as the Star Wars anthology series (though the word anthology has not been used in any of the titles, instead carrying the promotional "A Star Wars Story" subtitle).
Focused on how the Rebels obtained the Death Star plans introduced in the 1977 film, the first anthology film, Rogue One: A Star Wars Story, was released on December 16, 2016, to favorable reviews and box office success.
The second, Solo:
A Star Wars Story, centered on a young Han Solo with Chewbacca and Lando as supporting characters, was released on May 25, 2018, to generally favorable reviews and underperformance at the box office.
Despite this, more anthology films are expected to be released, following a hiatus after 2019's The Rise of Skywalker.

==
Television ==
The Star Wars franchise has been spun off to various television productions, including two animated series released in the mid-1980s.
Further animated series began to be released in the 2000s, the first two of which focused on the Clone Wars.
After Disney's acquisition of Lucasfilm, only the later one remained canon.
Eight live-action Star Wars series will be released on Disney+.
The first, The Mandalorian, premiered on November 12, 2019.
Star Wars won the 2020 Webby Award for Television & Film in the category Social.
=== Series ===


===
Films ===


===
Television special ===


==
In other media ==
From 1976 to 2014, the term Expanded Universe (EU) was an umbrella term for all officially licensed Star Wars storytelling material set outside the events depicted within the theatrical films, including novels, comics, and video games.
Lucasfilm maintained internal continuity between the films and television content and the EU material until April 25, 2014, when the company announced all of the EU works would cease production.
Existing works would no longer be considered canon to the franchise and subsequent reprints would be rebranded under the Star Wars Legends label, with downloadable content for the massively multiplayer online game
The Old Republic the only Legends material to still be produced.
The Star Wars canon was subsequently restructured to only include the existing six feature films, the animated film The Clone Wars (2008), and its companion animated series.
All future projects and creative developments across all types of media would be overseen and coordinated by the story group, announced as a division of Lucasfilm created to maintain continuity and a cohesive vision on the storytelling of the franchise.
Multiple comics series from Marvel and novels published by Del Rey were produced after the announcement.

===
Print media ===
Star Wars in print predates the release of the first film, with the December 1976 novelization of Star Wars, initially subtitled "From the Adventures of Luke Skywalker".
Credited to Lucas, it was ghostwritten by Alan Dean Foster.
The first "Expanded Universe" story appeared in Marvel Comics' Star Wars #7 in January 1978 (the first six issues being an adaptation of the film), followed by Foster's sequel novel Splinter of the Mind's Eye the following month.

====
Novels ====
After penning the novelization of the original film, Foster followed it with the sequel Splinter of the Mind's Eye (1978).
The novelizations of The Empire Strikes Back (1980) by Donald F. Glut and Return of the Jedi (1983) by James Kahn followed, as well as The Han Solo Adventures trilogy (1979–1980) by Brian Daley, and The Adventures of Lando Calrissian trilogy (1983) by L. Neil Smith.
Timothy Zahn's bestselling Thrawn trilogy (1991–1993) reignited interest in the franchise and introduced the popular characters Grand Admiral Thrawn, Mara Jade, Talon Karrde, and Gilad Pellaeon.
The first novel, Heir to the Empire, reached #1 on the New York Times Best Seller list, and the series finds Luke, Leia, and Han facing off against tactical genius Thrawn, who is plotting to retake the galaxy for the Empire.
In The Courtship of Princess Leia (1994) by Dave Wolverton, set immediately before the Thrawn trilogy, Leia considers an advantageous political marriage to Prince Isolder of the planet Hapes,  but she and Han ultimately marry.
Steve Perry's Shadows of the Empire (1996), set between The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi, was part of a multimedia campaign that included a comic book series and video game.
The novel introduced the crime lord Prince Xizor, another popular character who would appear in multiple other works.
Other notable series from Bantam include the Jedi Academy trilogy (1994) by Kevin J. Anderson, the 14-book Young Jedi Knights series (1995–1998) by Anderson and Rebecca Moesta, and the X-wing series (1996–2012) by Michael A. Stackpole and Aaron Allston.
Del Rey took over Star Wars book publishing in 1999, releasing what would become a 19-installment novel series called The New Jedi Order (1999–2003).
Written by multiple authors, the series was set 25 to 30 years after the original films and introduced the Yuuzhan Vong, a powerful alien race attempting to invade and conquer the entire galaxy.
The bestselling multi-author series Legacy of the Force (2006–2008) chronicles the crossover of Han and Leia's son Jacen Solo to the dark side of the Force; among his evil deeds, he kills Luke's wife Mara Jade as a sacrifice to join the Sith.
Although no longer canon, the story is paralleled in The Force Awakens with Han and Leia's son Ben Solo, who has become the dark Kylo Ren.
Three series set in the prequel era were introduced for younger audiences: the 18-book Jedi Apprentice (1999–2002) chronicles the adventures of Obi-Wan Kenobi and his master Qui-Gon Jinn in the years before The Phantom Menace; the 11-book Jedi Quest (2001–2004) follows Obi-Wan and his own apprentice, Anakin Skywalker in between The Phantom Menace and Attack of the Clones; and the 10-book
The Last of the Jedi (2005–2008), set almost immediately after Revenge of the Sith, features Obi-Wan and the last few surviving Jedi.

Although Thrawn had been designated a Legends character in 2014, he was reintroduced into the canon in the 2016 third season of Rebels, with Zahn returning to write more novels based in the character, and set in the new canon.

====
Comics ====
Marvel Comics published a Star Wars comic book series from 1977 to 1986.
Original Star Wars comics were serialized in the Marvel magazine Pizzazz between 1977 and 1979.
The 1977 installments were the first original Star Wars stories not directly adapted from the films to appear in print form, as they preceded those of the Star Wars comic series.
From 1985 to 1987, the animated children's series Ewoks and Droids inspired comic series from Marvel's Star Comics line.
According to Marvel comics former Editor-In-Chief Jim Shooter, the strong sales of Star Wars comics saved Marvel financially in 1977 and 1978.
Marvel's Star Wars series was one of the industry's top selling titles in 1979 and 1980.
The only downside for Marvel was that the 100,000 copy sales quota was surpassed quickly, allowing Lippincott to renegotiate the royalty arrangements from a position of strength.
In the late 1980s, Marvel dropped a new Star Wars comic it had in development, which was picked up by Dark Horse Comics and published as the popular Dark Empire series (1991–1995).
Dark Horse subsequently launched dozens of series set after the original film trilogy, including Tales of the Jedi (1993–1998), X-wing Rogue Squadron (1995–1998), Star Wars: Republic (1998–2006),
Star Wars Tales (1999–2005),
Star Wars: Empire (2002–2006), and Knights of the Old Republic (2006–2010).After Disney's acquisition of Lucasfilm, it was announced in January 2014 that in 2015 the Star Wars comics license would return to Marvel Comics, whose parent company, Marvel Entertainment, Disney had purchased in 2009.
Launched in 2015, the first three publications were titled Star Wars, Darth Vader, and the limited series Princess Leia.
First announced as Project Luminous at Star Wars Celebration in April 2019, full details of a publishing initiative called Star Wars: The High Republic were revealed in a press conference in February 2020.
Involving the majority of the current officially licensed publishers, a new era set 200 years before the Skywalker Saga will be explored in various books and comics.
These include ongoing titles by Marvel and IDW Publishing, written by Cavan Scott and Daniel José Older respectively, that will both premiere in August 2020.

===
Audio ===
====
Soundtracks and singles ====
John Williams composed the soundtracks for the nine episodic films; he has stated that he will retire from the franchise with The Rise of Skywalker.
He also composed Han Solo's theme for Solo: A Star Wars Story; John Powell adapted and composed the rest of the score.
Michael Giacchino composed the score of Rogue One.
Williams also created the main theme for Galaxy's Edge.
====
Audio novels ====
The first Star Wars audio work is The Story of Star Wars, an LP using audio samples from the original film and a new narration to retell the story, released in 1977.
Most later printed novels were adapted into audio novels, usually released on cassette tape and re-released on CD.
As of 2019, audio-only novels have been released not directly based on printed media.

====
Radio ====
Radio adaptations of the films were also produced.
Lucas, a fan of the NPR-affiliated campus radio station of his alma mater the University of Southern California, licensed the Star Wars radio rights to KUSC-FM for US$1.
The production used John Williams's original film score, along with Ben Burtt's sound effects.
The first was written by science-fiction author Brian Daley and directed by John Madden.
It was broadcast on National Public Radio in 1981, adapting the original 1977 film into 13 episodes.
Mark Hamill and Anthony Daniels reprised their film roles.
The overwhelming success, led to a 10-episode adaptation of The Empire Strikes Back debuted in 1983.
Billy Dee Williams joined the other two stars, reprising his role as Lando Calrissian.
In 1983, Buena Vista Records released an original, 30-minute Star Wars audio drama titled Rebel Mission to Ord Mantell, written by Daley.
In the 1990s, Time Warner Audio Publishing adapted several Star Wars series from Dark Horse Comics into audio dramas: the three-part Dark Empire saga, Tales of the Jedi, Dark Lords of the Sith, the Dark Forces trilogy, and Crimson Empire (1998).
Return of the Jedi was adapted into 6-episodes in 1996, featuring Daniels.

===
Video games ===
The Star Wars franchise has spawned over one hundred computer, video, and board games, dating back to some of the earliest home consoles.
Some are based directly on the movie material, while others rely heavily on the non-canonical Expanded Universe (rebranded as Star Wars Legends and removed from the canon in 2014).
Star Wars games have gone through three significant development eras, marked by a change in leadership among the developers: the early licensed games, those developed after the creation of LucasArts, and those created after the closure of the Lucasfilm division by Disney and the transfer of the license to Electronic Arts.

====
Early licensed games (1979–1993) ====
The first officially licensed electronic Star Wars game was Kenner's 1979 table-top Star Wars Electronic Battle Command.
In 1982, Parker Brothers published the first Star Wars video game for the Atari 2600, Star Wars:
The Empire Strikes Back, followed soon the year later by Star Wars: Jedi Arena, the first video game to depict lightsaber combat.
They were followed in 1983 by Atari's rail shooter arcade game Star Wars, with vector graphics to replicate the Death Star trench run scene from the 1977 film.
The next game, Star Wars:
Return of the Jedi (1984), has more traditional raster graphics, while the following Star Wars: The Empire Strikes Back (1985) has vector graphics.
Platform games were made for the Nintendo Entertainment System, including the Japan-exclusive Star Wars (1987), an international Star Wars (1991), and Star Wars:
The Empire Strikes Back (1992).
Super Star Wars (1992) was released for the Super Nintendo Entertainment System, with two sequels over the next two years.

====
LucasArts and modern self-published games (1993–2014) ====
Lucasfilm founded its own video game company in 1982, becoming best known for adventure games and World War II flight combat games, but as George Lucas took more interest in the increasing success of the video game market, he wanted to have more creative control over the games, and founded his own development company, LucasArts.
Improved graphics allowed games to tell complex narratives, which allowed for the retelling of the films, and eventually original narratives set in the same continuity, with voice-overs and CGI cutscenes.
In 1993, LucasArts released Star Wars: X-Wing, the first self-published Star Wars video game and the first space flight simulator based on the franchise.
It was one of the best-selling video games of 1993 and established its own series of games.
The Rogue Squadron series was released between 1998 and 2003, also focusing on space battles set during the films.

Dark Forces (1995), a hybrid adventure game incorporating puzzles and strategy, was the first Star Wars first-person shooter.
It featured gameplay and graphical features not then common in other games, made possible by LucasArts' custom-designed game engine, the Jedi.
The game was well received, and it was followed by four sequels.
The series introduced Kyle Katarn, who would appear in multiple games, novels, and comics.
Katarn is a former stormtrooper who joins the Rebellion and becomes a Jedi, a plot arc similar to that of Finn in the sequel trilogy films.
A massively multiplayer online role-playing game, Star Wars Galaxies, was in operation from 2003 until 2011.
After Disney bought Lucasfilm, LucasArts ceased its role as a developer in 2013, although it still operates as a licensor.

====
EA Star Wars (2014–present) ====
Following its acquisition of the franchise, Disney reassigned video game rights to Electronic Arts.
Games made during this era are considered canonical, and feature more influence from the Star Wars filmmakers.
Disney partnered with Lenovo to create the augmented reality video game Jedi Challenges, released in November 2017.
In August 2018, it was announced that Zynga would publish free-to-play Star Wars mobile games.
The Battlefront games received a canonical reboot in 2017.
Jedi:
Fallen Order was released in November 2019 and Star Wars:
Squadrons was released in October 2020.

===
Theme park attractions ===
In addition to the Disneyland ride Star Tours (1987) and its successor, Star Tours: The Adventures Continue (2011), many live attractions have been held at Disney parks, including the travelling exhibition Where Science Meets Imagination, the Space Mountain spin-off Hyperspace Mountain, a walkthrough Launch Bay, and the night-time A Galactic Spectacular.
An immersive themed area called Galaxy's Edge (2019) opened at Disneyland and opened at Walt Disney World in mid-2019.

A themed hotel, Star Wars:
Galactic Starcruiser, is currently under construction at Walt Disney World.

===
Multimedia projects ===
A multimedia project involves works released across multiple types of media.
Shadows of the Empire (1996) was a multimedia project set between The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi that included a novel by Steve Perry, a comic book series, a video game, and action figures.
The Force Unleashed (2008–2010) was a similar project set between Revenge of the Sith and A New Hope that included a novel, a 2008 video game and its 2010 sequel, a graphic novel, a role-playing game supplement, and toys.

===
Merchandising ===
The success of the Star Wars films led the franchise to become one of the most merchandised franchises in the world.
While filming the original 1977 film, George Lucas decided to take a $500,000 pay cut to his salary as director in exchange for full ownership of the franchise's merchandising rights.
By 1987, the first three films have made US$2.6 billion in merchandising revenue.
By 2012, the first six films produced approximately US$20 billion in merchandising revenue.
Kenner made the first Star Wars action figures to coincide with the release of the original film, and today the original figures are highly valuable.
Since the 1990s, Hasbro holds the rights to create action figures based on the saga.
Pez dispensers began to be produced in 1997.
Star Wars was the first intellectual property to be licensed in Lego history.
Lego has produced animated parody short films and mini-series to promote their Star Wars sets.
The Lego Star Wars video games are critically acclaimed bestsellers.
In 1977, the board game Star Wars: Escape from the Death Star was released.
A Star Wars Monopoly and themed versions of Trivial Pursuit and Battleship were released in 1997, with updated versions released in subsequent years.
The board game Risk has been adapted in two editions by Hasbro:
The Clone Wars Edition (2005) and the Original Trilogy Edition (2006).
Three Star Wars tabletop role-playing games have been developed: a version by West End Games in the 1980s and 1990s, one by Wizards of the Coast in the 2000s, and one by Fantasy Flight Games in the 2010s.

Star Wars Trading Cards have been published since the first "blue" series, by Topps, in 1977.
Dozens of series have been produced, with Topps being the licensed creator in the United States.
Each card series are of film stills or original art.
Many of the cards have become highly collectible with some very rare "promos", such as the 1993 Galaxy Series II "floating Yoda" P3 card often commanding US$1,000 or more.
While most "base" or "common card" sets are plentiful, many "insert" or "chase cards" are very rare.
From 1995 until 2001, Decipher, Inc. had the license for, created, and produced the Star Wars Customizable Card Game.

==
Themes ==
Star Wars features elements such as knighthood, chivalry, and Jungian archetypes such as "the shadow".

There are also many references to Christianity, such as in the appearance of Darth Maul, whose design draws heavily from traditional depictions of the devil.
Anakin was conceived of a virgin birth, and is assumed to be the "Chosen One", a messianic individual.
However, unlike Jesus, Anakin falls from grace, remaining evil as Darth Vader until Return of the Jedi.
According to Adam Driver, sequel
trilogy villain Kylo Ren, who idolizes Vader, believes he is "doing what he thinks is right".
George Lucas has said that the theme of the saga is redemption.
The saga draws heavily from the hero's journey, an archetypical template developed by comparative mythologist Joseph Campbell.
Each character—primarily Anakin, Luke, and Rey—follows the steps of the cycle or undergoes its reversal, becoming the villain.
A defining step of the journey is "Atonement with the Father".
Obi-Wan's loss of a father figure could have impacted his relationship with Anakin, whom both Obi-Wan and Palpatine are fatherlike mentors to.
Luke's discovery that Vader is his father has strong repurcussions on the saga and is regarded as one of the most influential plot twists in cinema.
Supreme Leader Snoke encourages Kylo Ren to kill his father, Han Solo.
Kylo uses the fact that Rey is an orphan to tempt her into joining the dark side.
According to Inverse, the final scene in The Last Jedi, which depicts servant children playing with a toy of Luke and one boy using the Force, symbolizes that "the Force can be found in people with humble beginnings."
===
Historical influences ===
Political science has been an important element of Star Wars since the franchise launched in 1977, focusing on a struggle between democracy and dictatorship.
Battles featuring the Ewoks and Gungans against the Empire and Trade Federation, respectively, represent the clash between a primitive society and a more advanced one, similar to the Vietnam-American War.
Darth Vader's design was initially inspired by Samurai armor, and also incorporated a German military helmet.
Originally, Lucas conceived of the Sith as a group that served the Emperor in the same way that the Schutzstaffel served Adolf Hitler; this was condensed into one character in the form of Vader.
Stormtroopers borrow the name of World War I German "shock" troopers.
Imperial officers wear uniforms resembling those of German forces during World War II, and political and security officers resemble the black-clad SS down to the stylized silver death's head on their caps.
World War II terms were used for names in the films; e.g. the planets Kessel (a term that refers to a group of encircled forces) and Hoth (after a German general who served on the snow-laden Eastern Front).
Shots of the commanders looking through AT-AT walker viewscreens in The Empire Strikes Back resemble tank interiors, and space battles in the original film were based on World War I and World War II dogfights.
Palpatine being a chancellor before becoming the Emperor in the prequel
trilogy alludes to Hitler's role before appointing himself Führer.
Lucas has also drawn parallels to historical dictators such as Julius Caesar, Napoleon Bonaparte, and politicians like Richard Nixon.
The Great Jedi Purge mirrors the events of the Night of the Long Knives.
The corruption of the Galactic Republic is modeled after the fall of the democratic Roman Republic and the formation of an empire.
On the inspiration for the First Order formed "from the ashes of the Empire", The Force Awakens
director J. J. Abrams spoke of conversations the writers had about how the Nazis could have escaped to Argentina after WWII and "started working together again."

==
Cultural impact ==
The Star Wars saga has had a significant impact on popular culture, with references to its fictional universe deeply embedded in everyday life.
Phrases like "evil empire" and
"May the Force be with you" have become part of the popular lexicon.
The first Star Wars film in 1977 was a cultural unifier, enjoyed by a wide spectrum of people.
The film can be said to have helped launch the science-fiction boom of the late 1970s and early 1980s, making science-fiction films a mainstream genre.
The widespread impact made it a prime target for parody works and homages, with popular examples including Hardware Wars, Spaceballs, The Family Guy Trilogy and Robot Chicken: Star Wars.

In 1989, the Library of Congress selected the original Star Wars film for preservation in the U.S. National Film Registry, as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant."
The Empire Strikes Back, was selected in 2010.
35mm reels of the 1997 Special Editions were the versions initially presented for preservation because of the difficulty of transferring from the original prints, but it was later revealed that the Library possesses a copyright deposit print of the original theatrical releases.

===
Industry ===
The original Star Wars film was a huge success for 20th Century Fox, and was credited for reinvigorating the company.
Within three weeks of the film's release, the studio's stock price doubled to a record high.
Prior to 1977, 20th Century Fox's greatest annual profits were $37 million, while in 1977, the company broke that record by posting a profit of $79 million.
The franchise helped Fox to change from an almost bankrupt production company to a thriving media conglomerate.
Star Wars fundamentally changed the aesthetics and narratives of Hollywood films, switching the focus of Hollywood-made films from deep, meaningful stories based on dramatic conflict, themes and irony to sprawling special-effects-laden blockbusters, as well as changing the Hollywood film industry in fundamental ways.
Before Star Wars, special effects in films had not appreciably advanced since the 1950s.
The commercial success of Star Wars created a boom in state-of-the-art special effects in the late 1970s.
Along with Jaws, Star Wars started the tradition of the summer blockbuster film in the entertainment industry, where films open on many screens at the same time and profitable franchises are important.
It created the model for the major film trilogy and showed that merchandising rights on a film could generate more money than the film itself did.
Film critic Roger Ebert wrote in his book The Great Movies, "Like The Birth of a Nation and Citizen Kane, Star Wars was a technical watershed that influenced many of the movies that came after.
"
It began a new generation of special effects and high-energy motion pictures.
The film was one of the first films to link genres together to invent a new, high-concept genre for filmmakers to build upon.
Finally, along with Steven Spielberg's Jaws, it shifted the film industry's focus away from personal filmmaking of the 1970s and towards fast-paced, big-budget blockbusters for younger audiences.
Some critics have blamed Star Wars and Jaws for "ruining" Hollywood by shifting its focus from "sophisticated" films such as The Godfather, Taxi Driver, and Annie Hall to films about spectacle and juvenile fantasy, and for the industry shift from stand-alone, one and done films, towards blockbuster franchises with multiple sequels and prequels.
One such critic, Peter Biskind, complained, "When all was said and done, Lucas and Spielberg returned the 1970s audience, grown sophisticated on a diet of European and New Hollywood films, to the simplicities of the pre-1960s Golden Age of movies...
They marched backward through the looking-glass.
"
In an opposing view, Tom Shone wrote that through Star Wars and Jaws, Lucas and Spielberg "didn't betray cinema at all: they plugged it back into the grid, returning the medium to its roots as a carnival sideshow, a magic act, one big special effect", which was "a kind of rebirth".
The original Star Wars trilogy is widely considered one of the best film trilogies in history.
Numerous filmmakers have been influenced by Star Wars, including Damon Lindelof, Dean Devlin, Roland Emmerich, John Lasseter, David Fincher, Joss Whedon, John Singleton, Kevin Smith, and later Star Wars directors J. J. Abrams and Gareth Edwards.
Lucas's concept of a "used universe" particularly influenced Ridley Scott's Blade Runner (1982) and Alien (1979), James Cameron's Aliens (1986) as well as The Terminator (1984), George Miller's Mad Max 2 (1981), and Peter Jackson's The Lord of the Rings trilogy (2001–2003).
Christopher Nolan cited Star Wars as an influence when making the 2010 blockbuster film Inception.

====
Fan works ====
The Star Wars saga has inspired many fans to create their own non-canon material set in the Star Wars galaxy.
In recent years, this has ranged from writing fan fiction to creating fan films.
In 2002, Lucasfilm sponsored the first annual Official Star Wars Fan Film Awards, officially recognizing filmmakers and the genre.
Because of concerns over potential copyright and trademark issues, however, the contest was initially open only to parodies, mockumentaries, and documentaries.
Fan fiction films set in the Star Wars universe were originally ineligible, but in 2007, Lucasfilm changed the submission standards to allow in-universe fiction entries.
Lucasfilm has allowed but not endorsed the creation of fan fiction, as long as it does not attempt to make a profit.

===
Academia ===
As the characters and the storyline of the original trilogy are so well known, educators have used the films in the classroom as a learning resource.

For example, a project in Western Australia honed elementary school students storytelling skills by role-playing action scenes from the movies and later creating props and audio/visual scenery to enhance their performance.

Others have used the films to encourage second-level students to integrate technology in the science classroom by making prototype lightsabers.
Similarly, psychiatrists in New Zealand and the US have advocated their use in the university classroom to explain different types of psychopathology.

== See also ==


== Notes ==


==
References ==


===
Citations ===


===
Sources ===


==
Further reading ==
Decker, Kevin S. (2005).
Star Wars and Philosophy.
Open Court.
ISBN 978-0-8126-9583-0.

Campbell, Joseph (1991).
The Power of Myth.
Anchor.
ISBN 978-0-385-41886-7.

Henderson, Mary (1997).
Star Wars: The Magic of Myth.
Bantam.
ISBN 978-0-553-10206-2.

Cavlelos, Jeanne (1999).
The Science of Star Wars.
St. Martin's Press.
ISBN 978-0-312-20958-2.

Nancy R. Reagin, Janice Liedl, ed.
(
2012).
Star Wars and History.
John Wiley & Sons.
ISBN 978-0-470-60200-3.

Star Wars:
Where Science Meets Imagination.
National Geographic & Boston Museum of Science.
October 2005.
ISBN 978-0-7922-6200-8.
==
External links ==
Official website
Star Wars on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Star Wars Map - 2020 official; HiRez; WebSite
The Skywalker family is a fictional legendary family in the Star Wars franchise.
Within the series' fictional universe, the Skywalkers are presented as a bloodline with strong inherent capabilities related to the Force.
Luke Skywalker, his twin sister Princess Leia, and their father Darth Vader are central characters in the original Star Wars film trilogy.
Darth Vader, in his previous identity as Anakin Skywalker, is the lead character in the prequel film trilogy; his mother Shmi is a minor character in the first and second film respectively.
Leia and Han Solo's son (and hence Luke's nephew and Anakin and Padmé's grandson)
Ben Solo, renamed Kylo Ren, is the antagonist of the sequel trilogy.
Shmi, Han, and Padmé are the only members who are not Force-sensitive.

==
History ==
In terms of the series' internal chronology, the Skywalkers first appeared in the 1999 film Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace.
In this film, Jedi Knight Qui-Gon Jinn discovers Shmi Skywalker and her son Anakin as slaves on the planet Tatooine.
Shmi informs Qui-Gon that Anakin has no father, leading Qui-Gon to suggest that Anakin is a product of midi-chlorians (Force-imparting microorganisms).
As the film progresses, Anakin leaves Tatooine to begin his Jedi training.
Star Wars:
Episode II – Attack of the Clones (2002) reveals that, in Anakin's absence, Shmi has married Cliegg Lars, becoming the stepmother of Owen.
Shmi later dies.
Owen tells Anakin they are stepbrothers and later marries Beru Whitesun.
Anakin secretly marries Naboo Senator Padmé Amidala at the end of the film.
In Star Wars: Episode III – Revenge of the Sith (2005), Padme dies giving birth to twins, Luke and Leia.
Luke is raised by Beru and Owen Lars on Tatooine.
Leia is raised by Senator Bail Organa and Queen Breha Organa on Alderaan.
Anakin, who has since become the Sith Lord Darth Vader, is unaware of his children's birth.
Neither of the twins know of their relation until the events of Star Wars: Episode VI –
Return of the Jedi
(1983).The Solo family is part of the Skywalker family.
In the 2018 spin-off film Solo:
A Star Wars Story (set between Episode III and 1977's Episode IV – A New Hope)
, orphan Han Solo steals to survive on the planet Corellia.
The last-name "Solo" is given to him by an Imperial Officer in his application to join the Imperial Flight Academy.
Since the last-name of Han's father is unknown, Han would be the first Solo.
In the 2015 film Star Wars: Episode VII – The Force Awakens, it is revealed that Han had a son named Ben with Leia.
The family breaks apart following Ben's descent into the dark side as Kylo Ren, with Leia and Han separating.
Luke is not revealed to have any children.
At the end of Star Wars: Episode IX – The Rise of Skywalker (2019), all blood-related members of the Skywalker bloodline have died out, as Leia dies to bring her son back to the light side and Ben Solo dies to save Rey.
Later, Rey adopts "Skywalker" as her surname to honor the Skywalker family and continue their legacy while cutting ties with her Palpatine lineage.

==
Family tree ==


===
Shmi Skywalker-Lars ===
Shmi Skywalker (portrayed by Pernilla August) is the mother of Anakin Skywalker, the mother-in-law of Padmé Amidala, the paternal grandmother of Luke Skywalker and Leia Organa, the grandmother-in-law of Han Solo, and the maternal great-grandmother of Ben Solo.
She appears in Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace and Star Wars: Episode II – Attack of the Clones.

Shmi was captured by pirates as a child, and was sold to the Hutts.
In a bet, Gardulla the Hutt lost Shmi to Watto.

In The Phantom Menace, she and her son are introduced as slaves of junk merchant Watto on the desert world Tatooine.
She welcomes Jedi Master Qui-Gon Jinn (Liam Neeson) into their home, and tells him that Anakin (Jake Lloyd) has no father; she simply became pregnant with him.
In spite of her poverty, Shmi tries to give Anakin a good home in the slave quarter of Mos Espa.
Qui-Gon helps Anakin win his freedom, but cannot get Shmi out of slavery.
She allows Anakin to leave with Qui-Gon, assuring her heartbroken son that they will meet again.

In Attack of the Clones, Anakin (Hayden Christensen), now a young adult Jedi apprentice, senses through the Force that she is in pain.
He travels to Tatooine to find her, and, upon arriving, learns that she had been freed by and married to moisture farmer Cliegg Lars (Jack Thompson), but had recently been abducted by Tusken Raiders.
He finds her inside one of their encampments, but it's too late—beaten and tortured beyond help, she dies in his arms.
Heartbroken and enraged, Anakin slaughters every single Tusken in the camp, including the women and children.
His mother's death ignites a strong anger in Anakin, and sets him on the path to becoming Darth Vader.
Anakin later brings Shmi's body back to the Lars' homestead where she is given a burial.

===
Anakin Skywalker ===
Anakin Skywalker is the son of Shmi Skywalker, born without a father through the Force.
He is the secret husband of Padmé Amidala, the father of Luke Skywalker and Leia Organa, the father-in-law of Han Solo, and the maternal grandfather of Ben Solo.
Anakin is discovered on Tatooine by Jedi Master Qui-Gon Jinn who is sure that the boy is the "Chosen One" of Jedi Prophecy, who will bring balance to the Force.
After the death of Qui-Gon, he becomes the Padawan of Obi-Wan Kenobi.
He also forms a close bond with Padmé Amidala, the young senator of Naboo.
The newly elected Chancellor of the Galactic Republic, Palpatine, also befriends Anakin, promising to watch the boy's progress "with great interest" and advise him.
Torn between his loyalty to the Jedi and his drive for power, Anakin succumbs to temptation and becomes Darth Vader.
As Vader, Anakin spends the following decades serving under Palpatine's Galactic Empire until reuniting with his son, Luke, redeeming himself by defeating his master to protect him while sacrificing himself in the process and becoming one with the Force.

Anakin is portrayed by Jake Lloyd in The Phantom Menace (1999) and Hayden Christensen in Attack of the Clones (2002) and Revenge of the Sith (2005).

===
Padmé Amidala ===
Padmé Amidala (portrayed by Natalie Portman) is the secret wife of Anakin Skywalker, the mother of Luke Skywalker and Leia Organa, the daughter-in-law of Shmi Skywalker, the mother-in-law of Han Solo, and the maternal grandmother of Ben Solo.
She served as Queen of Naboo, and later as a Senator for her planet.
Her closest friend in the Senate was Senator Bail Organa.
She reconnected and fell in love with Anakin Skywalker after he was assigned to protect her from an assassination attempt, and secretly married him shortly after the Battle of Geonosis.
Three years later, she reveals to Anakin that she is pregnant and plans to raise their child on Naboo.
She realizes that Anakin has started to have nightmares of her dying in childbirth and assures him that it was just a dream and that it won’t happen.
After Anakin turned to the dark side and massacred the Jedi at the Jedi Temple, she was told by Anakin that the Jedi had taken over the Republic.
Obi-Wan arrives and asks Padmé about her husband's whereabouts and informs her that he has turned to the dark side.
Padmé accuses Obi-Wan of lying and doesn’t believe that Anakin would kill younglings.
Obi-Wan states that Anakin is the father of Padmé’s child and sets off to find him.
Padmé tracks Anakin, now Darth Vader, to Mustafar and tries to persuade him to abandon the dark side, but Vader refuses and force chokes her unconscious when Obi-Wan arrives.
Padmé gives birth to her children shortly after the first Empire Day, whom she calls Luke and Leia.
Padmé tells Obi-Wan that she believes there is still good left in Vader, before passing away.
During her funeral, her body was altered to make her appear still pregnant.
Obi-Wan and Yoda decided to separate the children in order to keep them hidden from Darth Vader.

===
Luke Skywalker ===
Luke Skywalker (portrayed by Mark Hamill) is the brother of Leia Organa, the brother-in-law of Han Solo, the uncle of Ben Solo, the son of Anakin Skywalker and Padmé Amidala, and the grandson of Shmi Skywalker.
He is taken in by his uncle and aunt, Owen and Beru Lars, after the death of Padmé and Anakin's fall to the dark side.
He is Force-sensitive and skilled with a lightsaber.
In Return of the Jedi, a dying Yoda confirms to Luke, that Darth Vader (previously Anakin Skywalker) is actually his father, despite Luke's belief that Vader's claim to fatherhood in The Empire Strikes Back was a ruse to pull Luke to the dark side.
He also finds out from Obi-Wan's Force Ghost that Princess Leia Organa is his sister.
In The Force Awakens, as the last known Jedi, Luke is in hiding after failing to prevent his nephew and apprentice Ben Solo (now Kylo Ren) from turning to the dark side to join Supreme Leader Snoke and has cut himself off from the Force.
In The Last Jedi, a young scavenger named Rey has located Luke and tries to convince him to show her the ways of the Force, but he refuses.
After knowing the death of Han Solo, he trains Rey about how to use the Force and to become a Jedi.
Luke reveals to Rey that he sensed the dark side in Ben and was scared for him, but Ben retaliated by using the Force to collapse the hut, burying him underneath.
When he refuses to help Rey turn Ben back to the light, Luke plans to burn the Jedi Library tree and is greeted by Yoda, who convinces him to help Rey and not to mourn his failure of losing Ben to Snoke.
On the planet Crait, Luke appears with his old lightsaber and duels Ben, who tries to attack Luke, but he dodges them.
Luke tries to reason with Ben and then disappears, revealing that he was still on the island and that Ben was dueling a Force projection of him.
Luke falls to the ground and gets up, and afterwards dies after disappearing, becoming one with the Force


===
Leia Organa-Skywalker ===
Leia Amidala Skywalker (portrayed by Carrie Fisher) is the wife of Han Solo, the mother of Ben Solo, the sister of Luke Skywalker, the daughter of Anakin Skywalker and Padmé Amidala, and the granddaughter of Shmi Skywalker, raised by Bail and Breha Organa of Alderaan.
At age 19, she is the Princess of Alderaan, and is captured by Darth Vader while in the Tantive IV blockade runner on a so-called "diplomatic mission".
Leia is shown to be Force-sensitive.
In The Empire Strikes Back, Leia professes her love for Han Solo when he is put into carbonite stasis, although it is originally Han and Luke who compete for her affections.
In Return of the Jedi, planning to feed Luke, Han, and Chewbacca to the flesh eating Sarlacc, Jabba the Hutt is instead strangled to death by Leia by a chain he has on her.
She later becomes involved in the Battle of Endor.
In the years that follow, she becomes General Organa, the leader of the Resistance, a military organization unofficially backed by the New Republic to counter the First Order.
She married Han Solo and had a son named Ben Solo, later Kylo Ren, whose turning to the dark side separated the couple before the events of The Force Awakens.
Leia has been on a search to find her missing brother Luke and find a way to save her son from the dark side.
She dies spending her energy trying to reach Ben, which helps him come back to the light side.
Her body later disappears and she becomes one with the Force.

===
Han Solo ===
Han Solo (portrayed by Harrison Ford) is the husband of Leia Organa, the brother-in-law of Luke Skywalker, the father of Ben Solo, the son-in-law of Anakin Skywalker and Padmé Amidala, and the grandson-in-law of Shmi Skywalker.
The anthology film Solo:
A Star Wars Story reveals that Han Solo's father constructed ships on the planet Corellia, where Han was born.
The name of Han's dad is not known.
Han's surname, Solo, was not his birth name, with Han being given his Solo surname by an imperial officer right before Han joined the imperial flight academy, which he would leave three years after.
Han Solo's first film appearance however was in 1977's Star Wars:
A New Hope where he is played by Harrison Ford.
He and his Wookiee co-pilot and best friend, Chewbacca, are initially hired to transport Luke Skywalker and Obi-Wan Kenobi.
Han and Chewbacca later become involved in the Rebel Alliance and are committed to its cause.
Over the course of the franchise, Han becomes a military leader for the Alliance, falling in love with and marrying Leia Organa, with whom he has a son named Ben.
He is killed by Ben, who has become Kylo Ren, after failing to convince his son to turn from the dark side.
===
Ben Solo ===
Ben Solo (portrayed by Adam Driver) is the son of Leia Organa and Han Solo, the nephew of Luke Skywalker, the grandson of Anakin Skywalker and Padmé Amidala, and the great-grandson of Shmi Skywalker.
He initially trains to be a Jedi under his uncle, Luke.
Soon, Luke suspects Ben has been influenced by Snoke, and ignites his lightsaber because of instinct in an attempt to kill Ben in his sleep to prevent him from causing the destruction.
But when he thinks about killing Ben, Ben wakes up and this causes Ben to fall to the dark side.
Ben becomes Kylo Ren, working for the First Order and working under the influence of Snoke.
He also forms an uneasy alliance with General Hux.
Ren is obsessed with the legacy of his grandfather, the Sith Lord Darth Vader, and aspires to finish what Vader started: the elimination of the Jedi.
He stabs Han Solo, his father, in the heart but spares his mother when ordered to destroy her ship.
Ben becoming Kylo Ren also caused Han and Leia to break up, with neither of them able to stop loving their son.
Luke confronts him and also disappears trying to stop Ben's actions.
After his mother's death, Rey admits to him she did want to join him as Ben Solo, he then sees a vision of his father and he decides to come back to the light side becoming Ben Solo again.
Later, he sacrifices himself to bring Rey back to life, and forms a brief relationship with her before vanishing into the Force as the last of the Skywalker bloodline.

===
Rey Skywalker ===
Rey (portrayed by Daisy Ridley) is the paternal granddaughter of Emperor Palpatine.
As a child, Rey was hidden by her parents on the planet Jakku to save her from Palpatine.
Years later, Rey becomes the last Jedi apprentice of Luke Skywalker and Leia Organa.
At the end of The Rise of Skywalker, Rey adopts Skywalker as her surname; until then, she had been mononymous.

====
Possible Palpatine connection ====
Since the 2000s prequel trilogy, and according to the 2018 comic book Darth Vader: Dark Lord of the Sith written by Charles Soule and Giuseppe Camuncoli, it has been implied that Shmi Skywalker's impregnation was the result of Palpatine influencing the Force to do so, making Palpatine the father of Anakin Skywalker.
In an early draft of the script for Revenge of the Sith, Palpatine states that he is Anakin's father via this method.
In December 2019, after the release of The Rise of Skywalker, Matt Martin of the Lucasfilm Star Wars story group stated that Palpatine's involvement in Anakin's birth is not confirmed.

===
Extended family of the Skywalkers ===


====
Padmé Amidala's family ====


====
Lars family (Anakin’s step-father, half-brother, and Luke's adoptive family) ====


====
Organa family (Leia's adoptive family) ====


==
Legends ==
The following characters are exclusive to what is now retroactively known as the Legends brand since April 2014, and non-canonical to any and all Star Wars material produced under the ownership of the Walt Disney Company.
With the 2012 acquisition of Lucasfilm by The Walt Disney Company, most of the licensed Star Wars novels and comics produced since the originating 1977 film Star Wars were rebranded as Star Wars Legends and declared non-canon to the franchise in April 2014.Following the events of the original film trilogy, Leia and Han marry and have children, and Luke does likewise several years after they do.
The Skywalker bloodline branches from Luke and Leia's descendants, but only Luke's side continues to carry the Skywalker name.

Leia and Han marry in The Courtship of Princess Leia (1994) by Dave Wolverton.

Leia is pregnant with twins in  Timothy Zahn's Heir to the Empire (1991) and they are born in Zahn's The Last Command (1993).
Han and Leia have another child by the time of the Jedi Academy trilogy (1994) by Kevin J. Anderson, by which time Leia has become the Chief of State of the New Republic.
All three of the Solo children become Jedi Knights under the tutelage of their maternal uncle Luke Skywalker.
The Solo children were ranked as the 16th top Star Wars heroes, according to IGN in 2008.Having refounded the Jedi Order and trained several new Jedi including Leia, Luke eventually marries an enemy-turned-ally Mara Jade, and they have a son named Ben, who was voted the 40th top Star Wars character by IGN and
the 6th top Star Wars Expanded Universe character by UGO Networks.
===
Mara Jade ===
Mara Jade was created by Timothy Zahn as an antagonist for Heir to the Empire (1991), and she and Luke marry several years later in the comic miniseries Union (1999-2000).
She joins his restored Jedi Order, and they have a son, Ben Skywalker, in the middle of the New Jedi Order series (1999-2003).

===
Jaina Solo ===
Jaina Solo and
her twin brother Jacen were created by Timothy Zahn in the Star Wars
expanded universe novel The Last Command (1993).
She is the eldest child of Han Solo and Leia Organa Solo, and has appeared in various novels and the Champions of the Force set for the Star Wars Miniatures game.
Jaina, named after Han's mother, is born five minutes before her brother Jacen in the Thrawn trilogy (1991–93), set about five years after Return of the Jedi.
The twins, and eventually their younger brother, live at various safe havens for their first few years under the protection of Leia's handmaiden Winter.
The twins play a small role in Kevin J. Anderson's Jedi Academy trilogy (1994).
In Champions of the Force (1994), Jaina helps her brother defend their unconscious uncle from the spirit of Sith Lord Exar Kun.
In Vonda McIntyre's The Crystal Star (1994), Jaina is kidnapped and used in a plot, along with her siblings, to take advantage of their Force powers.
In the Corellian trilogy (1994), Jaina is again kidnapped but escapes.
Jaina becomes a major character in Young Jedi Knights (1995) as Jaina and Jacen begin their Jedi training.
Throughout the New Jedi Order series (1999–2003), Jaina pursues a life separate from her twin brother and becomes Mara Jade Skywalker's apprentice.
Jaina progresses quickly as a Jedi and a pilot, eventually joining Rogue Squadron.
She also develops a romantic relationship with Jagged Fel.
She briefly becomes the apprentice of fallen Jedi Kyp Durron.
Jaina's understanding and manipulation of Yuuzhan Vong technology causes them to associate her with their trickster goddess.
She is present at the conclusion of the war with the Yuuzhan Vong.
Walter Jon Williams, author of Destiny's Way (2002), noted that the plot concerning Jaina's love life caused some frantic rewrites.
Elaine Cunningham, author of the Dark Journey, commented that the story of the 2002 novel is a personal one focusing on a difficult time in Jaina's life.
In The Joiner King (2005), Jaina and the Jedi Zekk are joined in the Killik hive.
Jacen tricks them into attacking a Chiss base to provoke a war between the Chiss and the Killiks; Jaina, furious, vows that she will never fly with Jacen again.
In the Legacy of the Force series (2006–08), Jacen throws Jaina out of the Galactic Alliance when she refuses to follow his order to destroy a crippled ship.
She senses at this time a growing darkness in her twin.
In Betrayal (2006), Jacen falls to the dark side of the Force, and Jaina realizes her duty as the "Sword of the Jedi" requires her to stop him.
She turns to Boba Fett to train her.
In Invincible (2008), Jaina duels and kills Jacen.

In the Fate of the Jedi series (2009–12), Jaina is promoted to Jedi Master by Luke Skywalker, and marries Jagged Fel.
Her and Jagged's descendants include Emperor Roan Fel and his daughter Marasiah Fel in the Legacy series (2006-14), set nearly 140 years after Return of the Jedi.

In 2017, Hasbro released a 6" Jaina figure as a part of its Black Series line.

===
Jacen Solo ===
Jacen Solo is the son of Han Solo and Leia Organa, introduced in utero in the 1994 Star Wars expanded universe novel Heir to the Empire, and born and named in  The Last Command.
He is a major character in several Star Wars novels, particularly as the protagonist of The New Jedi Order series and later as the antagonist of the Legacy of the Force series, in which he becomes known as Darth Caedus.
IGN listed Jacen as #17 on their list of the top 100 Star Wars heroes, saying that he had a more "profound effect" than any other Solo children on the Star Wars setting.
Jesse Schedeen, writing for IGN, also listed him as #5 in a reader-inspired list of top Star Wars villains, and named the character's murder of Mara Jade as his "defining moment of villainy".
UGO.com listed Jacen as their top Star Wars expanded universe character, calling him "one of the most fearsome—and most tragic—villains in the Star Wars universe".
===
Anakin Solo ===
Anakin Solo is the youngest child born to Han Solo and Princess Leia, and the younger brother of Jacen and Jaina Solo.
Anakin is named after his maternal grandfather, Anakin Skywalker, and, like his namesake, is a talented pilot who is prodigiously gifted both in the Force and mechanical engineering.

Anakin appears as an infant and toddler in many Star Wars novels such as the Jedi Academy trilogy (1994).
Anakin and his siblings play central roles in other novels such as The Crystal Star (1994), the Corellian trilogy (1995) and The New Rebellion (1996).
Anakin's birth is featured in Tom Veitch's Dark Empire II comic book miniseries (May 1995).
He is first referred to as Han Solo, Jr. by his father, but Leia corrects him, having named the baby after her biological father, Anakin Skywalker, as a reminder of hope.
However, Anakin still fears the name and his grandfather's legacy.
On October 1, 1995, Nancy Richardson started the Junior Jedi Knights series with The Golden Globe starring Anakin and his best friend Tahiri Veila.
Anakin is now an eleven-year-old child starting his training at the Jedi Academy on Yavin 4.
Richardson continued Anakin's adventures in the following two novels, Lyric's World and Promises, before Rebecca Moesta finished the series with Anakin's Quest, Vader's Fortress, and Kenobi's Blade, starting in 1996.

Anakin appears in the Young Jedi Knights series by Kevin J. Anderson and Rebecca Moesta, which follows the adventures of Anakin's siblings, Jacen and Jaina.

In 1999, the first novel of the New Jedi Order series was published, entitled Vector Prime by R.A. Salvatore.
Anakin is now a teenager, who often spends time alone thinking about the role of the Force, and would get into arguments with his brother Jacen on the ways of a Jedi and the Force.
Anakin studies as a Jedi under his uncle, Luke Skywalker, who still sees his nephew as being too young and reckless.
In the novel's climax, his father's copilot and best friend, Chewbacca, dies saving Anakin's life.

Anakin plays major roles in Dark Tide:
Onslaught and Dark Tide
: Ruin by Michael A. Stackpole published 1 February 2000 and 1 June 2000, respectively, and is the main focus of the books Edge of Victory: Conquest and Edge of Victory:
Rebirth by Greg Keyes published April 1, 2001 and August 1, 2001, respectively.

In the 2001 novel Star by Star by Troy Denning, Anakin leads a team of Jedi to take out a dangerous enemy, resulting in his death.
Writers of the New Jedi Order storyline revealed in a question-and-answer section of the paperback edition of The Unifying Force published on August 3, 2004 that Anakin was supposed to be the hero of the story and lead the Jedi Order, but this was changed due to the release of the Star Wars prequel films, in which the hero was also named Anakin.
Instead, he dies in battle at the conclusion of the novel.

Even after his death, Anakin Solo has been mentioned several times in most following novels, including a possible appearance in Traitor by Matthew Stover, as a droid in Betrayal by Aaron Allston as Anakin Sal-Solo, and in Backlash, where he appeared to his maternal uncle Luke Skywalker and to Luke's son, Ben Skywalker by Aaron Allston.

Anakin is portrayed in the earlier books as being a genius and a loner, but is haunted by his name.

In Lyric's World, it is revealed that he loves to take computers apart and put them back together and sees it as a puzzle.
He would also have dreams of Emperor Palpatine and Darth Vader trying to persuade him to fall to the dark side of the Force; Anakin overcomes this fear in Anakin's Quest, in which he confronts himself.

===
Ben Skywalker ===
Luke Skywalker and Mara Jade Skywalker's son.
Named after Obi-Wan "Ben" Kenobi, Jedi Knight.
Former student of Jacen Solo, his cousin.
He inherits his mother's red hair and his father's blue eyes.
He is born during the New Jedi Order series (1999-2003).
In Fate of the Jedi: Outcast, he voluntarily accompanies his father into exile.
He proves himself as both a fighter and as an investigator to carry on his father's name.
His love interest is Vestara Khai, formerly a Sith apprentice, then a Jedi apprentice.
The character was voted the 40th top Star Wars character by IGN and the 6th top Star Wars Expanded Universe character by UGO Networks.

===
Allana Djo Solo ===
Allana Djo Solo is the daughter of Jacen Solo and Tenel Ka Djo, Jacen's fellow trainee at Luke's Jedi Academy.
She is born during the Dark Nest trilogy of novels.
In the Legacy of the Force series, Jacen becomes Darth Caedus partly to protect Allana from a dark fate which he forsees.
Her death is faked and she is adopted by her grandparents under the false identity of "Amelia", a supposed war orphan.
She lives and travels with them during the following series Fate of the Jedi.
By the end of that series, her Jedi training is about to begin.

===
Roan and Marasiah Fel ===
In the Star Wars: Legacy comic series, set over 120 years after the original trilogy, some of Leia's descendants have since become the ruling dynasty of a reformed, more benevolent Empire.
The first volume (2006-2010) recounts their struggles against a new Sith Order.
Emperor Roan Fel is Leia's great-grandson, Jaina Solo's grandson and the head of the Imperial Knights (who split from the Jedi refounded by Luke, but are still opposed to the dark side).
Marasiah Fel is his daughter and an imperial Knight herself.
They oppose the new Sith Order who have taken over most of the galaxy, and ally with Cade Skywalker and the surviving Jedi and Republic forces in order to fight them.

===
Nat Skywalker ===
Nat Skywalker is a former Jedi Master in Star Wars: Legacy, the grandson of Ben Skywalker, older brother of Kol Skywalker and the uncle of Cade Skywalker.
He took the name Bantha Rawk upon leaving the Jedi and works as a mechanic.

===
Kol Skywalker ===
Kol Skywalker is a character in Star Wars: Legacy.
A Jedi Master, he is the younger brother of Nat Skywalker, a grandson of Ben Skywalker (they share the same red hair color, and has green eyes like Ben's mother Mara Jade, he is the father of Cade Skywalker.

===
Ania Solo ===
The second volume of Star Wars: Legacy (2013-2014) follows Ania Solo, the great-granddaughter of Leia and granddaughter of Jacen Solo.
She is a junkyard trader who is embroiled in the continuing conflict between the new Sith and the Republic-Imperial alliance.

===
Cade Skywalker ===
Cade Skywalker is the descendant of Anakin Skywalker, Luke Skywalker, Mara Jade Skywalker and Ben Skywalker, the son of Kol Skywalker and the nephew of Nat Skywalker.
He is a protagonist of the Star Wars:
Legacy comic book series from Dark Horse, which takes place 125 years after Return of the Jedi.
Cade has completely abandoned the Jedi way after an attack by the New Sith Order on the Jedi Academy on Ossus.
Despite this, he still encounters other Jedi, as well as the ghost of his ancestor Luke Skywalker, and ultimately reclaims his heritage to fight the Sith.
The character was voted the 84th top Star Wars character by IGN.

== See also ==
Clan McDuck


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Skywalker family on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
A listing for "Union" at the Comic Book DataBase.

Star Wars: Union on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Princess Leia Organa is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise, portrayed in films by Carrie Fisher.
Introduced in the original Star Wars film in 1977, Leia is princess of the planet Alderaan, a member of the Imperial Senate and an agent of the Rebel Alliance.
She thwarts the sinister Sith lord Darth Vader and helps bring about the destruction of the Empire's cataclysmic superweapon, the Death Star.
In The Empire Strikes Back (1980), Leia commands a Rebel base and evades Vader as she falls in love with the smuggler Han Solo.
In Return of the Jedi (1983), Leia helps in the operation to rescue Han from the crime lord Jabba the Hutt, and is revealed to be Vader's daughter and the twin sister of Luke Skywalker.

The prequel film Revenge of the Sith (2005) establishes that the twins' mother is Senator (and former queen)
Padmé Amidala of Naboo, who dies after childbirth, while their father is none other than former Jedi Knight Anakin Skywalker, who would become Darth Vader.
Leia is adopted by Senator Bail and Queen Breha Organa of Alderaan.
In the sequel trilogy, Leia is the founder and General of the Resistance against the First Order.
She and Han have a son named Ben Solo, who adopted the name Kylo Ren after turning to the dark side of the Force and became the lead enforcer for the First Order.
In The Rise of Skywalker (2019), it is revealed that Leia was briefly trained as a Jedi by her brother sometime after Return of the Jedi.
In the film, Leia is the mentor of Rey, the last remaining Jedi.
Leia dies towards the end of the film, but returns in the epilogue scene as a Force ghost alongside Luke.

One of the more popular Star Wars characters, Leia has been called a 1980s icon, a feminist hero and model for other adventure heroines.
She has appeared in many derivative works and merchandising, including the now-noncanonical Star Wars Expanded Universe, and has been referenced or parodied in several TV shows and films.
Her 'cinnamon bun' hairstyle from Star Wars (1977) and metal bikini from Return of the Jedi have become cultural icons.
Fisher was nominated for the Saturn Award for Best Actress twice for A New Hope and Return of the Jedi.
Fisher later received two Saturn Award nominations for Best Supporting Actress, the first for The Force Awakens and the second being a posthumous nomination for The Last Jedi.

==
Creation and casting ==
Leia was created by Star Wars creator George Lucas, who in 1999 explained his early development of the main characters:
The first [version] talked about a princess and an old general.
The second version involved a father, his son, and his daughter; the daughter was the heroine of the film.
Now the daughter has become Luke, Mark Hamill's character.
There was also the story of two brothers where I transformed one of them into a sister.
The older brother was imprisoned, and the young sister had to rescue him and bring him back to their dad.

In the rough draft of Star Wars, Leia is the spoiled teenage daughter of King Kayos and Queen Breha of Aquilae, with two brothers, Biggs and Windy; Biggs returned to the fourth draft as a childhood friend of Luke.
Leia was at one point "the daughter of Owen Lars and his wife Beru ...
Luke's cousin–together they visit the grave of his mother, who perished with his father on a planet destroyed by the Death Star.
"
A later story synopsis establishes Leia as "Leia Antilles", the daughter of Bail Antilles from the peaceful world of Organa Major.
In the fourth draft it was established that "Leia Organa" came instead from Alderaan.
Fisher was 19 when she was cast as Princess Leia, with actresses including Amy Irving, Cindy Williams and Jodie Foster also up for the role.
In 2014, InkTank reported that the extended list of "more than two dozen actresses" who had auditioned for Leia included Glenn Close, Farrah Fawcett, Jessica Lange, Sissy Spacek, Sigourney Weaver, Cybill Shepherd, Jane Seymour, Anjelica Huston, Kim Basinger, Kathleen Turner, Geena Davis, Meryl Streep, and Terri Nunn.
Asked about Streep in 2015, Fisher said, "I've never heard that one.
But Jodie Foster was up for it...
that one I knew the most.
Amy Irving and Jodie.
And I got it."

On Leia's 'cinnamon bun' hairstyle, George Lucas stated that "In the 1977 film, I was working very hard to create something different that wasn't fashion, so I went with a kind of Southwestern Pancho Villa woman revolutionary look. ...
The buns are basically from turn-of-the-century Mexico."
Lucas later noted that Leia's mother, Padmé Amidala, wears a similar-looking Hopi hairstyle in Revenge of the Sith.
A photo depicting famous Mexican revolutionary Clara de la Rocha wearing a similar hairstyle exists in the Lucas Museum of Narrative Art archives.
In 2015, Mental Floss cited research suggesting that while female Mexican revolutionaries did not have such elaborate hairstyles, young marriageable Hopi women did, and their "squash blossom whorls" superficially resemble Leia's hair buns.
Leia's hairstyle may have also been inspired by that of Queen Fria in the 1939 Flash Gordon comic strip "The Ice Kingdom of Mongo", and scientist Barnes Wallis' wife Molly (played by Ursula Jeans) in the 1955 war film The Dam Busters.
Comparisons have also been made to the 4th-century-BC Iberian sculpture Lady of Elche, as well as the 1920s "earphones" hairstyle.
Composer John Williams created a musical leitmotif for Leia which recurs throughout the Star Wars saga. "
Princess Leia's Theme" was recorded as a concert suite (4:18 length) for the score of the 1977 film.

The second draft of the Return of the Jedi screenplay contained dialogue in which Obi-Wan tells Luke he has a twin sister.
She and their mother were "sent to the protection of friends in a distant system.
The mother died shortly thereafter, and Luke's sister was adopted by Ben's friends, the governor of Alderaan and his wife."
Fisher explained in 1983: "Leia's real father left her mother when she was pregnant, so her mother married this King Organa.
I was adopted and grew up set apart from other people because I was a princess."
==
Character ==
Anthony Breznican of Entertainment Weekly describes Leia as a "diplomat, spy, warrior, undercover agent".
Mark Edlitz calls her "a smart, feisty, brave diplomat and warrior" in The Huffington Post.
Fisher told Rolling Stone in 1983:
There are a lot of people who don't like my character in these movies; they think I'm some kind of space bitch.
She has no friends, no family; her planet was blown up in seconds ...
so all she has is a cause.
From the first film [Star Wars], she was just a soldier, front line and center.
The only way they knew to make the character strong was to make her angry.
In Return of the Jedi, she gets to be more feminine, more supportive, more affectionate.

She said in 2014:

I would rather have played Han Solo.
When I first read the script I thought that's the part to be, always wry and sardonic.
He's always that.
I feel like a lot of the time
Leia's either worried or pissed or, thank God, sort of snarky.
But I'm much more worried and pissed than Han Solo ever was, and those aren't fun things to play ...
I had a lot of fun killing Jabba the Hutt.
They asked me on the day if I wanted to have
a stunt double kill Jabba.
No!
That's the best time I ever had as an actor.
And the only reason to go into acting is if you can kill a giant monster.

==
Appearances ==


===
Skywalker saga ===


====
Original trilogy ====


=====
A New Hope =====
Introduced in the original 1977 film Star Wars, Princess Leia Organa of Alderaan is a member of the Imperial Senate.
She is captured by Darth Vader (portrayed by David Prowse, voiced by James Earl Jones) on board the ship Tantive IV, where she is acting as a spy for the Rebel Alliance.
Leia has secretly hidden the blueprints for the Death Star, the Empire's moon-sized battle station, inside the astromech droid R2-D2 (Kenny Baker) and has sent it to find one of the last remaining Jedi, Obi-Wan Kenobi (Alec Guinness), on the nearby planet of Tatooine.
Vader arrests Leia and has her tortured, but she resists revealing anything.
Death Star commander Grand Moff Tarkin (Peter Cushing) threatens to destroy her home planet Alderaan with the Death Star unless she reveals the location of the hidden Rebel base.
She provides the location of an old, abandoned base on the planet Dantooine, but Tarkin orders Alderaan to be destroyed anyway.
Leia is rescued by Luke Skywalker (Mark Hamill) and Han Solo (Harrison Ford), and they escape aboard Han's ship, the Millennium Falcon.
After analyzing the Death Star's schematics, the Rebels find a tiny weakness in the battle station, which Luke uses to destroy it in his X-wing fighter.
In the aftermath of the victory, Leia bestows medals on the heroes at the hidden Rebel base on Yavin 4.

Alyssa Rosenberg of The Washington Post writes of Leia in the film:
Leia's nerves as a revolutionary are clear from the moment she arrives on screen ...
She takes shots at the Storm Troopers boarding her ship, gets stunned with a blaster in her hand, then has the audacity to try to make Darth Vader feel ashamed of himself ...
She has enough energy left over after a nasty session of torture to insult Grand Moff Tarkin.
And while she grieves when her home planet, Alderaan, is destroyed by the Death Star, Leia's not paralyzed: when her unexpected rescuers show up, she’s ready to go, and to gripe about their operational sloppiness.

Rosenberg also notes that, though Han is almost immediately attracted to Leia, they conflict because she insists on asserting command and he automatically resists, even as she proves herself to be worthy of it.
And despite her initial disdain for the smuggler, whom she sees as selfish, Leia later acknowledges "I knew there was more to you than money" when Han comes through for the Rebellion.
Fisher told Rolling Stone in 1980 that in the original script, when Luke and Han come to rescue a captured Leia, "I was hanging upside down with yellow eyes, like in The Exorcist ...
Some form of radar torture was done to me
and I was in a beam, bruised and beaten up, suspended in midair.
The reason it was cut from the film was because I was unconscious and the Wookiee would have had to carry me for, like, the next fifteen minutes."
=====
The Empire Strikes Back =====
In The Empire Strikes Back (1980), Leia is at the Rebel base on Hoth.
She leads its evacuation during an Imperial attack, and then flees with Han, Chewbacca (Peter Mayhew) and C-3PO (Anthony Daniels) on the Millennium Falcon.
They dodge pursuing Imperial TIE fighters by flying into an asteroid field when the Falcon's hyperdrive breaks down, with Leia piloting the ship at one point.
Romance blossoms between Leia and Han during their flight from the Empire; while hiding in the stomach of a space slug, they finally share a kiss.
With his ship needing repairs, Han seeks out his old friend Lando Calrissian
(Billy Dee Williams) in Cloud City, the floating city over Bespin.
Though he welcomes them graciously, Lando soon turns them over to a newly arrived Darth Vader, who hopes to use them as bait to capture Luke.
Leia confesses her love for Han as he is frozen in carbonite and then handed over to bounty hunter Boba Fett (Jeremy Bulloch), who is charged with bringing him to the crime lord Jabba the Hutt.
Lando helps Leia, Chewbacca and the two droids escape.
Leia senses that Luke is in trouble, and goes back to save him after he is nearly killed during a lightsaber duel and confrontation with Vader.

Rosenberg notes:

Yes, it's slightly ridiculous ... that [Han] tries to pry a confession of affection out of her on Hoth, as Leia is trying to manage an evacuation with just an ion cannon for defense.
But Han's not wrong that if Leia doesn't figure out that she's a person with needs, she's going to burn out ...
In a way, it's an early confession of love:
Han’s anxious about the bounty hunters who are still pursuing him ...
But he would stay and give his love and support to Leia if she could just acknowledge that she needs him.

=====
Return of the Jedi =====
In Return of the Jedi (1983), Leia infiltrates Jabba the Hutt's palace on Tatooine disguised as the Ubese bounty hunter Boushh, and brings a captive Chewbacca with her as part of the ruse.
She frees Han from the carbonite, but they are recaptured by Jabba.
Leia is now chained to Jabba as his slave, outfitted in a metal bikini.
After Luke arrives and kills Jabba's Rancor, Jabba sentences Luke, Han and Chewbacca to be fed to the Sarlacc.
Lando (disguised as a guard) helps them overpower their captors, and Leia seizes the moment to strangle Jabba with her chain.
Luke and Leia swing to safety, blowing up Jabba's barge behind them.
Later, the heroes go to the forest moon of Endor to prepare for a battle with the Empire.
There, Luke reveals to Leia that she is his twin sister and that Vader is their father.
Leia joins Han in leading the Rebels in battle with Imperial troops as the Rebel Fleet attacks the second Death Star.
Leia is slightly injured, but the Rebels, with help from the Ewoks, ultimately defeat the forces of the Empire, with the Death Star destroyed once more.

Fisher told Rolling Stone in 1983, "In Return of the Jedi, [Leia] gets to be more feminine, more supportive, more affectionate.
But let's not forget that these movies are basically boys' fantasies.
So the other way they made her more female in this one was to have her take off her clothes."
Rosenberg writes of Han and Leia:
And we know those two crazy kids are locked for life in Return of the Jedi when it turns out that Han has accepted a Generalship in the Rebellion, keeping it a secret from Leia.
In A New Hope, Leia was grumbling about the quality of Han as a rescuer ...
But when she finds out what Han's done, accepting a rank he once found insulting and a mission she knows to be dangerous, Leia is the first person to volunteer to join his strike team.
In Star Wars, that's what love looks like:
trusting your partner’s commitment to the cause and respecting his strategic and technical judgement.

In the film, Leia says that she has vague memories of her real mother, who she describes as "kind... but sad".
Bouzereau quoted Lucas in 1997:
The part that I never really developed is the death of Luke and Leia's mother.
I had a backstory for her in earlier drafts, but it basically didn't survive.
When I got to Jedi, I wanted one of the kids to have some kind of memory of her because she will be a key figure in the new episodes
I'm writing.
But I really debated whether or not Leia should remember her.

====
Prequel
trilogy ====
=====
Revenge of the Sith =====
In the prequel film Revenge of the Sith (2005), Padmé Amidala (Natalie Portman) is pregnant with Anakin Skywalker's (Hayden Christensen) twins near the end of the Clone Wars.
After Anakin turns to the dark side of the Force and becomes Darth Vader, Padmé gives birth to Luke and Leia on Polis Massa and then dies.
Leia is adopted by Senator Bail Organa (Jimmy Smits) and his wife Queen Breha (Rebecca Jackson Mendoza) of Alderaan.

Film critic Peter Travers of Rolling Stone wrote, "As we watch Anakin nearly melt in the lava, only to be put together, Frankenstein style, in a lab while Lucas intercuts scenes of Padme giving birth to the twins Luke and Leia, a link to genuine feeling is established at last."
====
Sequel
trilogy ====
=====
The Force Awakens =====
In March 2013, Fisher confirmed that she would reprise her role as Leia in Star Wars:
The Force Awakens.
Set 30 years after Return of the Jedi, The Force Awakens reintroduces a Leia who is "a little more battle weary, a little more broken hearted".
In November 2015, director J. J. Abrams said of Leia, "She's referred to as General but ...
there's a moment in the movie where a character sort of slips and calls her 'Princess.'
"
Commenting on the story he added, "The stakes are pretty high in the story for her, so there's not much goofing around where Leia's concerned.
"
Asked how Leia is handling things in the film, Fisher said, "Not easily ...
[she is] solitary.
Under a lot of pressure.
Committed as ever to her cause, but I would imagine feeling somewhat defeated, tired, and pissed.
"In
the film, Leia is the leader of the Resistance, a group formed by the New Republic to fight a proxy war with the First Order (a group formed by the remnants of the Empire) and trying to find Luke, who disappeared years earlier.
When her forces foil a First Order attack searching for the Resistance astromech droid BB-8, Leia is reunited with Han, who has helped the renegade stormtrooper Finn (John Boyega) and orphaned scavenger Rey (Daisy Ridley) bring the droid this far.
Han and Leia have been estranged for many years; their marriage fell apart after their son, Ben Solo (Adam Driver), fell to the dark side and became the First Order commander Kylo Ren.
Leia believes Ben can still be brought back to the light side.
Han volunteers for a mission to infiltrate the First Order's Starkiller Base to disable its defensive shields.
Confronting Ren, Han tries to convince his son to leave the First Order, but Ren instead impales his father on his lightsaber.
Leia senses Han's death through the Force, and later shares a moment of grief with Rey, who had thought of Han as a mentor and father figure.
Leia sees Rey, Chewbacca, and
R2-D2 off when they depart to locate Luke, saying, "may the Force be with you".

Asked why Leia is not shown to be a Jedi in The Force Awakens (as she is in the Star Wars Expanded Universe works), Abrams told IGN, "It was a great question, and one that we talked about quite a bit, even with Carrie [Fisher].
Why did she not take advantage of this natural Force strength that this character had.
And one of the answers was that it was simply a choice that she made, that her decision to run the Rebellion, and ultimately this Resistance, and consider herself a General, as opposed to a Jedi.
It was simply a choice that she took".
He also added, "I would like to think that there really isn't much of a ticking clock, and it's never too late ...
clearly we've seen, and we do again, that she still is Force strong.
And it's something that I think is an intrinsic piece of her character.
Fisher was nominated for a 2016 Saturn Award for Best Supporting Actress for her portrayal.

=====
The Last Jedi =====
In December 2015, producer Kathleen Kennedy confirmed that Fisher would reprise the role of Leia in the next installment, then known as Star Wars:
Episode VIII, but later named Star Wars: The Last Jedi.
Fisher died on December 27, 2016, after going into cardiac arrest.
It was confirmed that she had completed filming her role in the film shortly before her death.
In the film, Leia is among those on the bridge of her flagship, the Raddus, who are expelled into space when the ship is attacked by the First Order.
Leia uses the Force to pull herself back to the ship.
After recovering, she shoots and stuns Resistance pilot Poe Dameron (Oscar Isaac), who has mutinied against her successor, Vice Admiral Holdo (Laura Dern).
From his solitude on Ahch-To, Luke projects himself through the Force to the Resistance stronghold on Crait and reunites with Leia, apologizing for what happened to Ben.
Leia replies that she knows her son is gone, but Luke reassures her that "no one's ever really gone".
While Luke distracts Kylo and his attacking First Order troops, Leia is among the remaining Resistance forces who escape from Crait in the Millennium Falcon.

=====
The Rise of Skywalker =====
Following Fisher's death, Variety reported that she was slated to appear in Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker and speculated that Lucasfilm would need to find a way to address her death and what would become of her character.
Filming began on August 1, 2018.
Lucasfilm announced in January 2017 that they had "no plans to digitally recreate Carrie Fisher's performance as Princess or General Leia Organa".
In April 2017, Fisher's family granted Disney and Lucasfilm the rights to use recent footage of the late actress in The Rise of Skywalker.
However, Kennedy subsequently said that Fisher would not appear in the film.
In July 2018, it was announced that Fisher would appear as Leia in The Rise of Skywalker, using unseen footage from The Force Awakens.
Initially, there had also been plans to use additional unseen footage of Leia from The Last Jedi, but it was ultimately not included in the ninth film.
Fisher's daughter Billie Lourd, who portrayed Lieutenant Connix in all three sequel trilogy films, also stepped in as Leia for a brief flashback in the film in which her face was digitally replaced by Fisher's likeness, using imagery from Return of the Jedi.
In the film, Leia continues to lead the Resistance while offering guidance and support to Rey as she continues her training to become a Jedi.
A flashback reveals that Leia had abandoned her own training after she had a vision foretelling her son's death if she finished.
While Rey and Ren duel on Kef Bir, a dying Leia uses all of her remaining strength to reach out to her son.
Distracted after sensing his mother's death, Ren is stabbed by Rey with his own lightsaber.
Leia passes away, making Rey experience overwhelming guilt.
Rey heals Ren's wound using the Force.
After the Battle of Exegol, a redeemed Ben Solo sacrifices the remainder of his life force to resurrect a dead Rey, and he vanishes at the same time as Leia becomes one with the Force.
Rey then returns to the Lars homestead on Tatooine and buries the lightsabers that had belonged to Leia and her father, Anakin Skywalker as the spirits of Luke and Leia look on with pride, with Rey honoring them by adopting the surname "Skywalker".
===
Anthology films ===


====
Rogue One:
A Star Wars Story ====
Leia makes a brief appearance in the final scene of the 2016 film Rogue One, receiving the plans for the Death Star as a lead-up to the beginning of A New Hope.
Since this movie takes place prior to the original Star Wars trilogy, a very young Leia was required.
To achieve that effect, a computer-generated image of a young Carrie Fisher was superimposed over Norwegian actress Ingvild Deila's face; archival audio of Fisher saying "Hope" was used to voice the character.

===
Television ===
Leia appears briefly in 1978's Star Wars Holiday Special television film as a leader and administrator of the new Rebel Alliance base.
She and C-3PO contact Chewbacca's wife Mallatobuck for assistance in finding Chewbacca and Han.
Leia also appears in the cartoon segment at a different Rebel Base, located in an asteroid field, and at the Life Day ceremony at the end of the film.
Fisher also appeared in and hosted the November 18, 1978, episode of Saturday Night Live that aired one day after the holiday special.

====
Star Wars Rebels ====
A teenage version of Princess Leia, voiced by Julie Dolan, appears in a 2016 episode of the animated series Star Wars Rebels, which is set between Revenge of the Sith and A New Hope.
In the episode, Leia is sent on a secret mission to assist the titular rebels.
Executive producer Dave Filoni said of the appearance:
We thought we had an opportunity to show her learning to be a leader, experimenting with the personality that becomes the stronger more resolute character you see in A New Hope.
One of the complex challenges of depicting Leia in Rebels is that we have to remind the audience that at this point she is part of the Empire.
She doesn't believe in the Empire, but she is acting the part, almost a double agent.

====
Star Wars Forces of Destiny ====
Leia appears in the animated series Star Wars Forces of Destiny, voiced by Shelby Young.

====
Star Wars Resistance ====
Leia appears in the animated series Star Wars Resistance, voiced by Rachel Butera and Carolyn Hennesy.

===
Novels ===
Leia makes her first literary appearance in Star Wars: From the Adventures of Luke Skywalker, the novelization of the original 1977 film Star Wars, which was released six months before the film in November 1976.
Credited to Lucas but ghostwritten by Alan Dean Foster, the novel was based on Lucas' screenplay.
Leia later appeared in the novelizations
The Empire Strikes Back (1980) by Donald F. Glut and Return of the Jedi (1983) by James Kahn.
She is also a point-of-view character in the 2015 novelization of The Force Awakens by Foster.
Foster's 1978 novel Splinter of the Mind's Eye was commissioned by Lucas as the basis for a potential low-budget sequel to Star Wars should the film prove unsuccessful.
In the story, Luke and Leia seek a crystal on a swampy planet and eventually face Vader in combat.

Leia also appears in the Journey to Star Wars:
The Force Awakens line of novels and comic books, introduced in conjunction with The Force Awakens to connect the film with previous installments.
She is the lead character in the young adult novel Moving Target: A Princess Leia Adventure (2015) by Cecil Castellucci and Jason Fry, which is set between The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi, and Claudia Gray's novels Star Wars: Bloodline (2016) and Leia: Princess of Alderaan (2017).
The former is set six years before The Force Awakens, while the latter features a 16-year-old Leia before the events of A New Hope.
===
Comics ===
Leia is the lead character in the five-part comic limited series Star Wars: Princess Leia (2015), taking place immediately after Episode IV: A New Hope.
She is also featured prominently in the four-part comic limited series Star Wars: Shattered Empire (2015), set immediately after Return of the Jedi.
Princess Leia reveals Leia to have had royal training in martial arts and explores her reaction to the destruction of Alderaan, while Shattered Empire portrays her as a skilled pilot who undertakes a dangerous mission alongside Poe Dameron's mother.
In Princess Leia and Shattered Empire, Leia senses the past while on Naboo (briefly envisioning her mother and Darth Maul, respectively), and in Star Wars #12, she uses a lightsaber as a weapon for the first time, canonically.
===
Legends works ===
The original three Star Wars films have spawned a large franchise of works that include novels, comic books, and video games.
Leia appears in much of this material.
In April 2014 (with the sequel film The Force Awakens in production), Lucasfilm excluded the Star Wars Expanded Universe from official Star Wars canon, rebranding it as Star Wars Legends.
In this continuity, Leia continues her adventures with Han and Luke after Return of the Jedi, fighting Imperial resurgences and new threats to the galaxy.
She becomes the Chief of State of the New Republic and a Jedi master, and is the mother to three children by Han: Jaina, Jacen and Anakin Solo.

====
Novels ====
The 1991 New York Times bestselling novel Heir to the Empire by Timothy Zahn began what would become a large collection of works set before, between and especially after the original films.

=====
Post-Return of the Jedi =====
The bestselling Thrawn trilogy (1991–93)
by Timothy Zahn begins five years after the events of Return of the Jedi.
In Heir to the Empire (1991), Leia is married to Han and three months pregnant with twins.
Noghri commandos repeatedly attempt to kidnap her as part of Grand Admiral Thrawn's plan to restore the Empire and crush the New Republic.
In Dark Force Rising (1992), Leia realizes that Darth Vader and the Empire deceived the Noghri to secure their allegiance, and by revealing the truth she turns the alien race to the side of the New Republic.
At one point, she remembers her adoptive parents on Alderaan, implying that the "mother" she discussed with Luke on Endor was Queen Breha.
In The Last Command (1993), Leia gives birth to the twins Jaina and Jacen Solo on Coruscant during Thrawn's siege.
Leia, now the Chief of State of the New Republic, is a minor character in the Jedi Academy trilogy (1994) by Kevin J. Anderson, set after the Thrawn trilogy.
Next in the timeline is the Callista trilogy: Children of the Jedi (1995) by Barbara Hambly, Darksaber (1995) by Anderson and Planet of Twilight (1997) by Hambly.
In The Crystal Star (1994) by Vonda McIntyre, young Jacen, Jaina and their three-year-old brother Anakin are kidnapped in a plot to restore the Empire, but are rescued by Leia and Chewbacca.
Leia struggles with the responsibilities of her position in The Black Fleet Crisis trilogy (1996) by Michael P. Kube-McDowell.
In The New Rebellion (1996) by Kristine Kathryn Rusch, she avoids an assassination attempt and then aids in the defeat of the Dark Jedi Kueller, whom she shoots to death.
The Corellian trilogy (1995) by Roger MacBride Allen finds Han and Leia swept up in a civil war while visiting his homeworld of Corellia with their children.
In the two Hand of Thrawn novels by Timothy Zahn (1997's Specter of the Past and 1998's Vision of the Future), Leia tries to hold the New Republic together as Moff Disra conspires for its volatile factions to destroy each other.
Leia appears periodically in the Young Jedi Knights series (1995–98) by Kevin J. Anderson and Rebecca Moesta.
The 14-volume young adult fiction series covers the Jedi training of Jacen and Jaina.
In The Truce at Bakura (1993) by Kathy Tyers, set one day after the ending of Return of the Jedi, Leia establishes New Alderaan, a sanctuary for the destroyed planet's surviving inhabitants.
The spirit of Anakin Skywalker appears to Leia and pleads for her forgiveness, but she angrily banishes him.
The six-volume Jedi Prince series (1992–93) by Paul Davids and Hollace Davids, later contradicted by other novels, is set within a year after Return of the Jedi.
In The Glove of Darth Vader (1992), the self-proclaimed son of the defeated Emperor Palpatine, Trioculus, seeks the titular glove to cement himself as the new Emperor.
Entranced by Leia's beauty in The Lost City of the Jedi (1992),
Trioculus vows to make her his queen.
He captures her in Zorba the Hutt's Revenge (1992), but Jabba the Hutt's vengeful father, Zorba, offers to trade his own prisoner Ken—Palpatine's real grandson whom Trioculus has been seeking—for Leia, his son's killer.
But Leia and Ken are rescued and Trioculus is frozen in carbonate by Zorba.
Mission from Mount Yoda (1993) finds Ken's father Triclops alive and willing to join the Rebels against the Empire.
Leia, now engaged to Han, is captured by Zorba in Queen of the Empire (1993).
Trioculus is revived and seizes Leia before Zorba can kill her.
Leia is rescued and replaced with a lookalike droid decoy, which kills Trioculus.
In Prophets of the Dark Side (1993), Leia looks forward to her wedding to Han and has a vision of their two children.
Matthew Stover's 2008 standalone novel Luke Skywalker and the Shadows of Mindor picks up the story soon after, as Luke, Leia and the Rebels fight the Sith Lord Shadowspawn.

In The Courtship of Princess Leia (1994) by Dave Wolverton, set immediately before the Thrawn trilogy, Leia is presented with an advantageous political marriage to Prince Isolder of the planet Hapes.
A jealous Han abducts Leia and takes her to the planet Dathomir; Luke and Isolder follow, and there they all find the hidden forces of the Imperial warlord Zsinj.
Defeating him, Han and Leia marry.
The 2003 novels A
Forest Apart and Tatooine Ghost by Troy Denning are set immediately after The Courtship of Princess Leia.
The newly married Leia fears that any children she has may succumb to the dark side like her father.
During an adventure on Tatooine in Tatooine Ghost, she discovers the diary of her grandmother Shmi Skywalker and meets some of young Anakin's childhood friends.
When she learns of Anakin's childhood as a slave and the traumatic death of his mother, Leia learns to forgive her father.

=====
Works set between films =====
In Shadows of the Empire (1996) by Steve Perry, the only Star Wars novel set between The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi, Leia is searching for Boba Fett to find a captive Han.
She is bewitched by the crime lord Prince Xizor using pheromones, but Chewbacca helps her elude the seduction.
Allegiance (2007) and Choices of One (2011) by Timothy Zahn are set between Star Wars:
A New Hope and The Empire Strikes Back, and feature Leia and her cohorts seeking new allies for their Rebellion against the Empire.
Razor's Edge (2013) by Martha Wells and Honor Among Thieves (2014) by
James S. A. Corey take place in the same time period and also chronicle the adventures of Leia and Han.

=====
New Jedi Order =====
In the New Jedi Order series (1999–2003), Leia resigns as Chief of State, and on the heels of her warnings before the Senate, the alien Yuuzhan Vong invade the galaxy.
They destroy system after system and defeat both the Jedi and the New Republic forces in countless battles.
Chewbacca dies in Vector Prime (1999) by R.A. Salvatore, which sends Han into a deep depression that causes a rift between him and Leia.
They reunite after Leia is gravely wounded at the Battle of Duro in Kathy Tyers' Balance Point (2000).
She is targeted by a deadly Voxyn slayer in Troy Dennings' Star By Star (2001), and though she manages to evade death, her son Anakin is later killed during a mission to prevent more Voxyn from being cloned.
The Vong are finally defeated in The Unifying Force (2003) by James Luceno.

In Denning's The Dark Nest trilogy (2005), Leia, Han and several Jedi become involved in an escalating border dispute between the Chiss and the insidious insectoid Killiks, and Leia makes a bitter enemy in the Twi'lek warrior Alema Rar.
In The Joiner King (2005), Leia asks Saba Sebatyne to train her as a Jedi Knight.
R2-D2 malfunctions in The Unseen Queen (2005) and shows Luke a holoclip of his father Anakin and a pregnant woman, whom Luke learns is his and Leia's biological mother, Padmé Amidala.
Anakin and Padmé are discussing a dream of Anakin's in which Padmé dies in childbirth; later, Luke and Leia watch a clip in which Padmé is talking to Obi-Wan Kenobi about Anakin.
Tenel Ka, Queen Mother of the Hapes Consortium, has a daughter, Allana, secretly fathered by Jacen.
In The Swarm War (2005), Luke and Leia view holoclips of their mother's death, and Leia is promoted to Jedi Knight.

=====
Legacy of the Force =====
The bestselling Legacy of the Force series (2006–08) chronicles the crossover of Han and Leia's son Jacen to the dark side of the Force while the Jedi, Solos and Skywalkers fight against his growing power.
In Betrayal (2006) by Aaron Allston, Jacen turns to the dark side, believing that it is the only way to save the galaxy from the chaos brewing among the member systems of the Galactic Alliance.
Jacen realizes in Bloodlines (2006) by Karen Traviss that the Sith discipline will require him to kill one of his loved ones, which he decides is an acceptable sacrifice to save the galaxy.
In Troy Denning's Tempest (2006), Han and Leia thwart the assassination of Tenel Ka and Allana, but become caught up in a Corellian conspiracy.
They are almost killed when the Millennium Falcon is attacked by a Star Destroyer controlled by an increasingly powerful Jacen—who knows that his parents are on board.
With Han injured, Leia and Lando further investigate the Corellians in Aaron Allston's Exile (2007), but Alema reappears to exact her vengeance on Leia.
Sacrifice (2007) by Karen Traviss finds Leia and Han on the run, hunted by Jacen as traitors to the Galactic Alliance.
He kills Luke's wife Mara Jade as his final sacrifice to become Darth Caedus, the new ruler of the Sith.
In Inferno (2007) by Troy Denning, Han and Leia are faced with the reality that their son, now Joint Chief of State, is the enemy.
Leia attempts unsuccessfully to manipulate Jacen in Aaron Allston's Fury (2007)
so that the Jedi can both thwart him and neutralize Alema.
Finally, in Invincible (2008) by Troy Denning, Jaina kills Jacen in a lightsaber duel.
At Tenel Ka's request, Leia and Han adopt Allana, disguised with the name "Amelia" to protect her from any future vengeance against Cadeus or the Hapes Consortium.
Multiple novels in the series made the New York Times Best Seller list.
The nine-volume Fate of the Jedi series (2009–12) by Aaron Allston, Troy Denning and Christie Golden finds Han and Leia become caught up in the intensifying conflict between the Galactic Alliance and the Jedi.
In the wake of Darth Cadeus' death, the now-peaceful Galactic Alliance harbors a growing mistrust toward the Jedi, and the situation is worsened by a Force-induced psychosis that begins afflicting individual Jedi, sending them on violent rampages.

In Millennium Falcon (2008) by James Luceno, set between Legacy of the Force and Fate of the Jedi, a mysterious device hidden inside the eponymous spacecraft sends Han, Leia and Allana on an adventure to investigate the ship's past before it came into Han's possession.
Troy Denning's Crucible (2013), set after Fate of the Jedi and the last novel to date in the Star Wars Legends chronology, reunites Leia, Han and Luke with Lando as they aid him to thwart a vast criminal enterprise threatening his asteroid mineral refinery in the Chilean Rift nebula.

====
Comics ====
Leia's youth is depicted in the non-canon Star Wars Tales story, The Princess Leia Diaries.
In it, she develops her disdain for the Empire, as well as a conflict with Tarkin.
She discovers and decides to support the Rebellion.

=====
Dark Empire =====
During the events of the comic series Dark Empire (1991–92), Palpatine has been resurrected in a young clone body and seduces Luke to the dark side of the Force as part of his plan to restore the Empire.
A captive Leia, resisting Palpatine's attempts to turn her as well, escapes with an artifact he needs to secure his power, the Jedi Holocron.
Luke pursues her, and Leia manages to turn him back.
Brother and sister then fight Palpatine with the light side of the Force, turning his own Force-generated storm against him and destroying Palpatine and his Star Destroyer.
In Dark Empire II (1994–95), Leia gives birth to a third child by Han, whom she names Anakin.
Palpatine is reborn in an inferior, rapidly deteriorating clone body in Empire's End (1995), and seeks to possess the body of the infant Anakin.

==
Cultural impact ==
Princess Leia has been called a 1980s icon, a feminist hero and "an exemplary personification of female empowerment".
In 2008, Leia was selected by Empire magazine as the 89th greatest film character of all time, and IGN listed her as their 8th top Star Wars hero.
UGO Networks listed Leia as one of their best heroes of all time in 2010.The character has been referenced or parodied in several TV shows and films, and celebrated in cosplay.
Fisher appeared in the Leia metal bikini on the cover of the Summer 1983 issue of Rolling Stone, and a painting of Leia and other characters surrounding Lucas appeared on the cover of the May 25, 1983 issue of Time announcing Return of the Jedi.
In 2013, cartoonist Jeffrey Brown published the bestselling Star Wars: Vader's Little Princess, a comic strip-style book featuring Darth Vader and a young Leia in humorous father-daughter situations.
Princess Leia appears on a 2007 US postage stamp and a 2015 UK stamp.

Leia has also been used in a wide range of Star Wars merchandise, including statuettes, action figures and other toys, household items and clothing, office supplies, food products, and bubble bath and shampoo in Leia-shaped bottles with her head as the cap.
In her one-woman show Wishful Drinking, Fisher called the Princess Leia Pez dispenser one of the "merchandising horrors" of the series.
In a 2011 interview, Fisher said:I signed away my likeness for free.
In those days, there was no such thing as a "likeness" ...
There was no merchandising tied to movies.
No one could have known the extent of the franchise.
Not that I don't think I’m cute or anything, but when I looked in the mirror, I didn't think I was signing away anything of value.
Lately I feel like I
’m
Minnie Mouse—the identity of Princess Leia
so eclipses any other identity that I’ve ever had.

After the 2012 acquisition of LucasFilm by the Walt Disney Company, the Disney Store stated in May 2014 that the company had "no plans for Leia products".
After public criticism, Disney told Time in June 2014 that it would be releasing several Leia products.
Funko has since produced several versions of Leia (at least one for each film) in their POP!
line of 4.5-inch vinyl figures in the Japanese super deformed style.
Hasbro is set to release an action figure of Leia as she appears in the Star Wars Rebels animated series.

===
"Cinnamon buns" hairstyle ===
Leia's unique hairdo in 1977's A New Hope has come to be known as the "doughnut" or "cinnamon buns" hairstyle, and is iconic of the character and series.
A February 1978 cover story for the British teen magazine Jackie included step-by-step instructions on how to replicate Leia's hair buns.
In the 1978 short film parody Hardware Wars, Princess Anne-Droid has actual cinnamon buns on the side of her head.
Miss Piggy of The Muppet Show copied the hairdo in a Star Wars-themed episode of the series in February 1980.
In the 1987 Mel Brooks comedy film Spaceballs, Princess Vespa (Daphne Zuniga) appears to have the hairstyle, which is soon revealed to
in fact be a large pair of headphones.
In the parody film Thumb Wars, the role of Leia was filled by a character named Princess Bunhead, who has two cinnamon rolls for hair.
In 2015, Fisher's daughter Billie Lourd's character in the horror-comedy TV series Scream Queens, a rich and disaffected sorority girl known as Chanel No.
3, wears earmuffs in every scene as an homage to Fisher's iconic Leia hairstyle.
Lourd also has a cameo in The Force Awakens (2015) in which she wears Leia's distinctive hair buns.

===
Feminist analysis ===
Leia has been the subject of feminist analysis.
Mark Edlitz wrote for The Huffington Post in 2010 that "Leia is an exemplary personification of female empowerment."
David Bushman, television curator at the Paley Center for Media, said in 2012, "From the male perspective ...
Princess Leia was a very creditable character for her time—not perfect, but certainly defiant, assertive, and strong."
Alyssa Rosenberg of The Washington Post wrote in 2015, "Leia wasn't just the first great heroine of science fiction and fantasy to capture my imagination.
She was one of the first characters I encountered whose power came from her political conviction and acumen.
"
In her 2007 article "Feminism and the Force: Empowerment and Disillusionment in a Galaxy Far, Far Away", Diana Dominguez cited Leia as a welcome change from the previous portrayals of women in film and TV.
She wrote:

Here was a woman who could play like and with the boys, but who didn't have to become one of the boys and who could, if and when she wanted to, show she liked the boys, a woman who is outspoken, unashamed, and, most importantly, unpunished for being so.
She isn't a flirty sex-pot, tossing her hair around seductively to distract the enemy ...
She doesn't play the role of "Maternal caretaker", although she does display caring and compassion, or "the sweet innocent damsel" who stands passively by while the men do all the work, but does step aside to let them do what they're good at when it is wise to do so ...
Leia is a hero without losing her gendered status; she does not have to play the cute, helpless sex kitten or become sexless and androgynous to get what she wants.
She can be strong, sassy, outspoken, bossy, and bitchy, and still be respected and seen as feminine.

Rosenberg writes that, though at first Luke is an apolitical innocent in search of adventure and Han is a detached opportunist in search of money, both are "influenced by Leia's passion [and] take their places as full participants in the Rebellion".
She notes, "Everyone else eventually comes around to Leia's view of the world."
Leia herself, singularly dedicated to her political movement against the Empire, "finds a partner in Han, acknowledging that personal happiness can help her sustain her commitment to building a better galactic order".
Rosenberg cites "Leia's willingness to see the best in him, and Han's desire to live up to her belief in him" as a foundation of their relationship, also pointing out his attempts to make her recognize that she has needs like anyone else and should acknowledge that she needs him.
In their 2012 essay "Lightsabers, Political Arenas, and Marriages", Ray Merlock and Kathy Merlock Jackson cite Leia as the successor of earlier science fiction heroines Wilma Deering of Buck Rogers and Dale Arden of Flash Gordon, and the embodiment of "a new stage in the ongoing presentation of the fairy-tale princess in jeopardy".
Writing that "after Leia, no longer would princesses be passive and salvaged simply with a kiss," they note the reflection of the character in later Disney Princess animated films and in woman warriors such as Ellen Ripley from the Alien franchise and Xena of the adventure TV series Xena:
Warrior Princess.
A. O. Scott of The New York Times described Leia as "a foremother of Hermione Granger and Katniss Everdeen and of countless latter-day Disney princesses.
She also foretold the recent, somewhat belated feminist turn in the Star Wars cycle
itself".
Mark Hamill described Fisher's performance as:
She was effortlessly feminist, you know?
She wasn't some shrinking violet that needed a guy to come rescue her.
In fact, she made Han and Luke look like chumps.
She was anything but what I expected.
I mean, I sort of thought
, "Well, she's 19, that's barely out of high school."
And in many ways, she was a lot older and wiser than I was.

Fisher herself described Leia as a "huge" feminist icon, dismissing the suggestion that the character was ever a "damsel in distress".
Fisher said of Leia, "She bossed them around.
I don't know what your idea of distress is, but that wasn't it!
And I wasn't some babe running through the galaxy with my tits bouncing around.
So I wasn't threatening to women".
She added, "I like Princess Leia.
I like how she was feisty.
I like how she killed Jabba the Hutt".
"
I think I am Princess Leia, and Princess Leia is me.
It's like a moebius striptease."
===
Metal bikini ===
Leia's slave costume when she is held captive by Jabba the Hutt at the beginning of Return of the Jedi—made of brass and dubbed Leia's "Metal Bikini" or "Gold Bikini"—immediately made the character (and Fisher) a "generational sex symbol" celebrated by pin-up posters, and later merchandising and cosplay.
The outfit has gained a cult following of its own.
Rosenberg noted that "the costume has become culturally iconic in a way that has slipped loose from the context of the scenes in which Leia wore it and the things she does after she is forced into the outfit."
Wired wrote in 2006, "There's no doubt that the sight of Carrie Fisher in the gold sci-fi swimsuit was burned into the sweaty subconscious of a generation of fanboys hitting puberty in the spring of 1983.
"
Acknowledging the opinion of some that the "Slave Leia" iconography tarnishes the character's position as "feminist hero", Rosenberg argues:

Leia may be captive in these scenes, but she's not exactly a compliant fantasy.
Instead, she's biding her time for the moment when she can put that fury into action, carrying out a carefully laid plan to rescue her lover.
And when that moment comes, the bikini doesn't condemn Leia to passivity.
She rises, and uses the very chains that bind her to strangle the creature who tried to take away her power by turning her into a sex object.

Science fiction filmmaker Letia Clouston concurs, saying "Sci-fi has had a long history of strong female characters.
Yes, Princess Leia was in a gold bikini, but she was also the one who single-handedly killed Jabba.
When you take into account movies and TV shows like Terminator, Aliens, Battlestar Galactica, and even video games like Metroid, you can see sci-fi has consistently promoted the strength of women more than any other genre."
==
Relationships ==


===
Family tree ===


===
Mentorship tree ===


==
See also ==
List of Kenner Star Wars action figures
Solo family


==
References ==
Footnotes
Citations


==
External links ==
Princess Leia in the StarWars.com Databank
Princess Leia on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Leia Organa on IMDb
Han Solo is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise created by George Lucas.
The character first appeared in the 1977 film Star Wars portrayed by Harrison Ford, who reprised his role in The Empire Strikes Back (1980) and Return of the Jedi (1983).
Ford returned to the role for The Force Awakens (2015), as well as a brief cameo in The Rise of Skywalker (2019).
In the spin-off film Solo: A Star Wars Story (2018), a younger version of the character was portrayed by Alden Ehrenreich.

The character is the captain of the Millennium Falcon who, along with Wookiee co-pilot Chewbacca, becomes affiliated with the Rebel Alliance in their war against the Galactic Empire when he transports Jedi Ben Kenobi and his pupil Luke Skywalker to Alderaan.
He also meets Leia Organa, whom he eventually marries and with whom he has a son, Ben Solo, who later becomes the villain Kylo Ren.
Thirty years later, he is murdered by his own son while helping the young scavenger Rey destroy Starkiller Base, the First Order’s battle station.

The American Film Institute has named Solo as the 14th best film hero.
Mythologist Joseph Campbell has described the character, "He thinks he's an egoist; but he really isn't.
...
there's something else pushing [him].
"
In 1997, Lucas described Han as "a cynical loner who realizes the importance of being part of a group and helping for the common good".

Ever since his debut, Han Solo has remained one of the most famous characters from the Star Wars series.
In addition to the character being hailed as one of cinema's greatest heroes, Harrison Ford's performances in the franchise have received significant acclaim from critics and fans.
Alden Ehrenreich's performance in Solo was also well received.
Ford received two nominations for the Saturn Award for Best Actor, winning for his performance in The Force Awakens.

==
Appearances ==


===
Skywalker saga ===


====
Original trilogy ====


====
A New Hope ====
Han Solo is introduced in Star Wars (1977), when he and his co-pilot Chewbacca (Peter Mayhew) accept a charter request to transport Luke Skywalker, Obi-Wan Kenobi, C-3PO, and
R2-D2 from Tatooine to Alderaan on their ship, the Millennium Falcon.
Han owes gangster Jabba the Hutt a great deal of money and has a high price on his head.
Bounty hunter Greedo (Paul Blake) tries to deliver Solo to Jabba, dead or alive, but after a failed attempt to extort the money as a bribe for letting him go, Han shoots and kills Greedo.
Han then prepares to leave Tatooine.

He and his passengers are attacked by Imperial stormtroopers, but escape by accelerating to light speed.
When they arrive at Alderaan, however, they discover that the planet has been destroyed by the Empire.
The Falcon is then captured and held within the Death Star, a moon-sized battle station constructed by the Empire.
Han and company hide from detection inside the Falcon's smuggling bays, and infiltrate the station disguised as stormtroopers.
They discover that Princess Leia Organa (Carrie Fisher) is a prisoner on board, and Luke convinces Han to help rescue her by promising him a huge reward.
They rescue Leia and escape, though Obi-Wan is killed by Sith Lord Darth Vader (portrayed by David Prowse, voiced by James Earl Jones).

After delivering Luke, Leia, C-3PO, and R2-D2 to the Rebel Alliance, Han and Chewbacca receive a payment for their services and prepare to leave.
Luke asks Han to stay and help the Rebels attack the Death Star, but he refuses, not wanting to get involved.
Han has a change of heart and returns to save Luke's life during the film's climactic battle scene, ultimately enabling Luke to destroy the Death Star.
In the film's final scene, Leia presents Han with a medal of honor alongside Luke and Chewbacca.

====
The Empire Strikes Back ====
Three years later, Han is still with the Rebel Alliance, and serving on the Rebels' base on the frozen planet of Hoth.
While out on patrol with Luke, they witness a meteor strike the surface.
Han returns to base while Luke decides to investigate.
Han informs Leia that he must leave in order to clear his debt with Jabba the Hutt.
Before he can depart, it is discovered that Luke has not returned from his investigation.
Han rides out alone into the frozen Hoth wastelands, soon finding Luke near death from exposure.
Using his friend's lightsaber, Han cuts open his tauntaun, providing Luke warmth while he builds a shelter until they can be rescued the next morning.

Later, Han and Chewbacca go to check on another meteor strike.
They discover that the 'meteor' is actually an Imperial Probe Droid.
The two succeed in destroying the probe, but not before the Empire is alerted to the location of the Rebel base.
When the Empire attacks, Han, Chewbacca, Leia, and C-3PO narrowly escape on board the Millennium Falcon.
Han evades a squad of Imperial TIE fighters by flying through an asteroid field, and unwittingly flies into the mouth of a giant worm.
Han and Leia fall in love during the long journey.
They manage to hide from the Imperial fleet long enough to escape, but not entirely unnoticed; bounty hunter Boba Fett (Jeremy Bulloch), working for Vader, picks up their trail and follows them.

Han and company eventually end up at the Bespin system's Cloud City seeking repairs and shelter from his old friend Lando Calrissian
(Billy Dee Williams), the city's administrator.
However, Fett had arrived first and alerted the Empire.
Lando betrays Han to the Empire, and Vader has Han tortured as part of his plan to lure Luke to Bespin.
Vader wishes to capture Luke by freezing him in carbonite, and subjects Han to the freezing process first to test its lethality.
Han survives, and Fett leaves for Tatooine with his frozen body in tow to collect the bounty from Jabba.

====
Return of the Jedi ====
A year later, Han, still imprisoned in carbonite, is Jabba's favorite decoration at his palace on Tatooine.
Luke attempts a rescue operation aided by Leia, Chewbacca, C-3PO, R2-D2, and a repentant Lando, but they are caught.
Jabba sentences
Han and Luke to die in the Sarlaac Pit.
Luke, Leia, and Han overpower their captors and Leia kills Jabba, enabling their escape.

Returning to the Rebel fleet, they discover that the Empire is building another Death Star, which orbits the forest moon of Endor.
Following his return, Han is made a general in the Rebel Alliance, along with Leia.
Reuniting with Luke after his return from Dagobah, Han leads the Rebels to Endor to take down the force field surrounding the battle station, which is still under construction.
With help from the native Ewoks, Han and his team destroy the Death Star's shield generator, allowing Lando and his strike team to destroy the Death Star.
Han then reunites with Leia and Luke on Endor to celebrate the defeat of the Empire.

====
Sequel
trilogy ====
=====
The Force Awakens =====
In The Force Awakens, set approximately 30 years after Return of the Jedi, Han has returned to his old life as a smuggler.
Before the events of the film, he and Chewbacca had lost the Millennium Falcon to thieves, but they reclaim the ship after it takes off from the planet Jakku, piloted by the scavenger Rey (Daisy Ridley) and the renegade stormtrooper Finn (John Boyega).
As mercenaries close in on them, Han takes the Falcon into light speed, and they get away.

When Han learns that Rey is looking for Luke, who disappeared years before, he takes them to his old friend Maz Kanata (Lupita Nyong'o), who can deliver the droid BB-8 to the Resistance against the tyrannical First Order.
They are forced to flee when First Order troops descend upon them.
Han is impressed with Rey's piloting skills, and offers her a job on the Falcon, but she declines.
When Rey is kidnapped by the First Order, Han sees her being carried off by First Order commander Kylo Ren (Adam Driver), whom Han seems to recognize.

Han and Finn meet with the Resistance, which is led by Leia, whom Han has not seen in several years.
It is then revealed that Ren is actually their son, Ben Solo, who trained as a Jedi under Luke.
However, he was corrupted by the First Order's Supreme Leader Snoke (Andy Serkis), and turned to the dark side of the Force.
As Kylo Ren, he betrayed the Republic and destroyed the Jedi—much like his grandfather, Darth Vader, had done decades before.
Heartbroken by Ben's betrayal, Han and Leia separated.
Leia asks Han to find Ben and bring him home, convinced that there is still good in him.

Han and Chewbacca go with Finn to the First Order's superweapon, Starkiller Base, to destroy the base and rescue Rey.
There, he sees Ren walk onto the bridge above the reactor chasm.
Han follows Ren onto the bridge, and calls out to him by his real name.
Han pleads with him to abandon the dark side and come back with him, warning him that Snoke will kill him once he has taken control of the galaxy.
Ren tells Han that he knows what he should do, but that he doesn't have the strength to do it, and asks Han to help him.
Han agrees.
After a moment, Ren ignites his lightsaber, impaling and fatally wounding his father.
Han looks into his son's eyes and touches his face before falling off the bridge to his death.

=====
The Last Jedi =====
The film briefly pays homage to Han.
The first scene includes a bomb which has "Han says hi" written on it in an alien language.
Later in the film, Luke asks where Han is after reuniting with Chewie.
During the climax, Luke hands Leia Han's gold dice (though this turns out to be part of an apparition).
=====
The Rise of Skywalker =====
Han appears briefly in The Rise of Skywalker.
After a near-fatal duel with Rey and the death of Leia, Ren experiences a vision of Han, who tells his son that Kylo Ren is dead, but Ben Solo is alive.
Han urges his son to do the right thing and come back to the light side.
In an allusion to their final interaction, Ren admits that he knows what he has to do but is not sure if he has the strength, while Han encourages his son and touches his face.
Drawing his lightsaber, Ren turns and throws it away, becoming Ben Solo once again.
When he turns around, Han has vanished.
At the end, Chewbacca is given Han's medal from the end of the original film.
===
Anthology films ===


====
Solo:
A Star Wars Story ====
A film featuring Han Solo before the events of the 1977 film was released on May 25, 2018, starring Alden Ehrenreich.
In the film, 19-year old Han is characterized to be an orphan on the planet Corellia.
He and his lover, Qi'ra (Emilia Clarke), attempt to escape from a criminal gang and bribe an Imperial officer with a stolen sample of coaxium, a powerful hyperspace fuel, in exchange for passage on an outgoing transport, but Qi'ra is apprehended before she can board.
Han vows to return for her and joins the Imperial Navy as a flight cadet.
He is given the surname "Solo" by the recruiting officer, apparently referencing Han's statement that he "has no people".

Three years later, Han has been expelled from the Imperial Flight Academy for insubordination and gets transferred to the Imperial Army.
While serving as an infantryman during a battle on Mimban, he encounters a gang of criminals posing as Imperial soldiers led by Tobias Beckett (Woody Harrelson).
He tries to blackmail them into taking him with them, but Beckett has him arrested for desertion and thrown into a pit to be fed to a beast – a Wookiee named Chewbacca.
Able to speak Chewbacca's language, Han persuades the Wookie to escape with him.
In need of extra hands, Beckett rescues the two and enlists them in the gang's plot to steal a shipment of coaxium, which goes awry.
Han and Chewbacca then accompany Beckett to explain their failure to Dryden Vos (Paul Bettany), a powerful crime lord in the Crimson Dawn syndicate and Beckett's boss.
They also find Qi'ra, who is now Vos' top lieutenant.
Han suggests a risky plan to steal unrefined coaxium from the mines on the planet Kessel; Vos approves but insists that Qi'ra accompany the team.

Qi'ra leads them to Lando Calrissian (Donald Glover), an accomplished smuggler and pilot who she hopes will lend them his ship.
Han challenges Lando to a game of sabacc, with the wager being Lando's ship.
Lando cheats to win but agrees to join the mission in exchange for a share of the profits.
The team boards his ship, the Millennium Falcon, and heads for Kessel.
The theft is a success partly thanks to Han piloting the ship through a dangerous uncharted route, but Han and Qi'ra become sympathetic to the Rebel Alliance, who are trying to prevent the syndicates and the Galactic Empire from gaining greater domination over the galaxy.
They try to trick Vos, but Beckett has already alerted him to the double-cross.
Vos sends his guards to kill the rebels, but having anticipated Vos' strategy, Han warns the Rebels, who kill the guards instead, leaving Vos defenseless.
Han then tries to take the coaxium, only for Beckett to betray Vos, escape with the coaxium and take Chewbacca hostage.
Though pressured to kill Han in order to prove her loyalty to Vos, Qi'ra instead kills Vos and sends Han after Beckett before contacting Vos' superior, Maul (portrayed by Ray Park, voiced by Sam Witwer).

Han catches up to Beckett and kills him, and he and Chewbacca turn the coaxium over to the Rebels.
Their leader, Enfys Nest (Erin Kellyman), offers Han a chance to join them; when he declines, she gives him one vial of coaxium, enough to buy a ship of his own.
Han and Chewbacca track down Lando, who abandoned them in the Falcon when confronted by the Rebels earlier, and challenge him to another game of sabacc, once again wagering the ship.
Han wins this time, having stolen the card Lando was using to cheat, and he and Chewbacca leave for Tatooine in the Falcon, where a gangster is putting together a crew for a heist.

===
Television ===
In the Star Wars Holiday Special (1978), Han helps Chewbacca join his family on the Wookiee homeworld Kashyyyk.
He faces Imperial forces on Kashyyyk, and later joins Luke, Leia, R2-D2, C-3PO, Chewbacca, and other Wookiees for their holiday, Life Day.
It includes an animated segment, where Ford voices an animated Han Solo.

Han appeared in the animated Star Wars Forces of Destiny episode "Tracker Trouble" (2017), where he was voiced by Kiff VandenHeuvel.
===
Comics and novels ===
Han is a main character in the 2015 Star Wars comic series.
Issue #6 introduces Sana Starros as Han Solo's wife, although a few issues later she is revealed to have only posed as his wife as part of a scam.
Star Wars: Han Solo (2016) is a five-issue mini-series set between Star Wars and The Empire Strikes Back, which focuses on Han participating in a race called the Dragon Void Rule.
The comic adaptation of Solo: A Star Wars Story reveals that Solo knew his father worked in the shipyards of Corellia.
The Star Wars:
Han Solo - Imperial Cadet comic depicts his rebellious days under the Empire.

====
Legends ====
In April 2014, most of the licensed Star Wars novels and comics produced since the originating 1977 film were rebranded by Lucasfilm as Star Wars Legends and declared non-canon to the franchise.
In Legends continuity, Solo is from an old family line that stretches thousands of generations.
Solo's ancestor, King Berethon E Solo ruled the planet Corellia (the Solo homeworld) during the Golden Age of the Old Republic, and set up a constitutional monarchy in 312 BBY (Before the Battle of Yavin).
His descendants continued to rule Corellia until the establishment of the Diktat centuries later.
By 29 BBY, their declining status had driven them out of rule and into poverty.
Han Solo was born to Jonash and Jaina Solo during this time.
Solo plays a central role in many Star Wars stories set after Return of the Jedi.
In The Courtship of Princess Leia (1995), he resigns his commission to pursue Leia, whom he eventually marries.
Solo and Leia have three children: twins Jaina and Jacen and son Anakin.
A cousin, Thrackan Sal-Solo, appears as an antagonist in the Corellian trilogy.
Han Solo is the general in command of the New Republic task force assigned to track down Imperial Warlord Zsinj and his forces in the 1999 novel Solo Command.
Chewbacca dies saving Anakin's life in Vector Prime (1999), sending Solo into a deep depression.
In Star by Star (2001), Anakin dies as well, compounding Solo's despair.
At the end of the series, however, Solo accepts the deaths of his son and his best friend, and reconciles with his family.

In the Legacy of the Force series, Jacen becomes the Sith Lord Darth Caedus and plunges the galaxy into a bloody civil war.
Han disowns Jacen, but is still devastated by each new outrage his son commits.
He and Leia adopt Allana (Jacen's daughter) after Jacen's death at Jaina's hands in the novel Invincible.

Brian Daley wrote a series of novels (The Han Solo Adventures), first published in 1979, exploring Han Solo and Chewbacca's smuggling adventures, and Ann C. Crispin's The Han Solo Trilogy (1997–1998) further develops the character's backstory.
Crispin's books depict Solo as a beggar and pickpocket throughout much of his youth.
He becomes a pilot and, in the process of undermining a religious fraud, falls in love with Bria Tharen, who disappears before Solo joins the Imperial Navy.
Solo loses his commission and is cashiered when he refuses an order to skin Chewbacca for commandeering a ship carrying Wookiee children destined for slavery; Chewbacca, in turn, swears a "life-debt" to Solo.
The two become smugglers, and help repel an Imperial blockade of a Hutt moon.
Solo soon thereafter wins the Millennium Falcon from Lando Calrissian in a card tournament.
Tharen, now a Rebel agent, reappears and asks for Solo, Chewbacca and Calrissian's help in attacking a slave colony.
After succeeding, Tharen's troopers steal the smuggler's valuables to aid the Rebel Alliance.
To compensate their losses, Solo and Chewbacca accept a smuggling job from Jabba the Hutt; but Imperial ships force the smugglers to jettison their cargo, invoking the debt Solo and Chewbacca owe the Hutt at the beginning of A New Hope.

==
Conception and casting ==
In the earliest version of the initial draft for Star Wars, Solo was a Ureallian with green skin, no nose and enormous gills, also being a member of the Jedi Bendu and being acquainted with General Skywalker.
The following draft saw Solo as bearded, flamboyant pirate, Lucas settling on making him a human to better develop the relationship between the three central characters (Luke, Leia and Han) and Chewbacca
instead being used for the part of the alien sidekick.
By the time of the third draft, Solo had developed into the "tough James Dean style starpilot" that would appear in the finished film.
Lucas also used Humphrey Bogart as a point of reference in his development notes.
Harrison Ford was not immediately cast for the role of Han Solo, as George Lucas had already used him in the film American Graffiti and wanted somebody new for the role.
He hired Ford to rehearse lines with other actors and he was so impressed by the actor's performance that he eventually gave him the role.
Other actors that were considered for the role include: Al Pacino, Christopher Walken, Jack Nicholson, Sylvester Stallone, Kurt Russell, Bill Murray, Steve Martin, Robert Englund, Nick Nolte, Burt Reynolds, Chevy Chase, and Perry King (who later played Han Solo in the radio plays).

Mythologist Joseph Campbell said of Han, "He thinks he's an egoist; but he really isn't.
...
there's something else pushing [him].
"
In 1997, franchise creator George Lucas described him as "a cynical loner who realizes the importance of being part of a group and helping for the common good".
Solo appeared in early drafts of Star Wars:
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith.
The character would have been revealed as having been raised by Chewbacca on Kashyyyk, and would help Yoda locate General Grievous.
Some concept art of a 10-year-old Han Solo was made, but Lucas decided to omit the character's appearance from the film before any actor was cast or considered for the role.
Ford, believing his character should die, was reluctant to sign onto the sequels of Star Wars.
Han Solo's death in The Force Awakens came about when writer/director J. J. Abrams felt the character was not evolving or contributing to the story's development; he believed that Kylo Ren killing his own father would give him a chance to develop into a worthy successor for Darth Vader.
Solo's appearance in the film was influenced by that of Rooster Cogburn (Jeff Bridges) in True Grit (2010) during early concept development.

==
Influence and critical reaction ==
Han Solo is a reckless smuggler with a sarcastic wit; he is "a very practical guy" and considers himself "a materialist"; but the adventures in the first Star Wars movie evoke his compassion, a trait
"he didn't know he
possessed".
The American Film Institute ranked Solo as the 14th greatest film hero.
He was also deemed the 4th greatest movie character of all time by Empire magazine.
Entertainment Weekly ranked the character 7th on their list of "The All-Time Coolest Heroes in Pop Culture".
On their list of the "100 Greatest Fictional Characters", Fandomania.com ranked Solo at number 15.
IGN listed Han Solo as the second greatest  Star Wars character of all time (behind Darth Vader), as well as listing him as one of the top 10 characters who most needed a spin-off, saying he was "Arguably the coolest character in the Star Wars universe".
Prince of Persia producer Ben Mattes explained that their "inspiration was anything Harrison Ford has ever done: Indiana Jones, Han Solo".
The antihero of the Japanese manga and anime Space Adventure Cobra has been compared by reviewers to Solo.
In preparing to play James T. Kirk, Chris Pine drew inspiration from Ford's depictions of Han Solo and Indiana Jones, highlighting their humor and "accidental hero" traits.
Ford won a 2016 Saturn Award for Best Actor for his performance in The Force Awakens.

==
Merchandising ==
Solo has been merchandised in multiple media, including action figures, video games, and other collectibles.
A Han Solo action figure with "human proportions" was released in 1977 to follow with the initial release of the original Star Wars films, while a figure created for the films' mid-1990s re-release was criticized as "unrealistically muscled.
"In
June 2018, Han Solo's blaster from 1983's Return of the Jedi was auctioned for $550,000.
Ripley's Believe It or Not!
bought the item at the Hollywood Legends auction at Planet Hollywood casino-resort in Las Vegas.

==
Family tree ==


==
See also ==
Han shot first
Solo family
Space Western
Indiana Jones
Captain Kirk


== Notes ==


==
References ==


==
Further reading ==
Dunk, Steve (January 1, 2018).
"
What's So Great About Han Solo Anyways?".
TheForce.net.
==
External links ==
Han Solo in the StarWars.com Databank
Han Solo on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Han Solo on IMDb
Kylo Ren is a fictional character and a major antagonist in the Star Wars franchise.
Introduced in the 2015 film Star Wars: The Force Awakens, he is portrayed by Adam Driver.
Kylo Ren is the chosen name of Ben Solo, the only child of original Star Wars trilogy characters Han Solo and Princess Leia Organa.
Though trained by his uncle Luke Skywalker as a Jedi, he was seduced to the dark side of the Force by Supreme Leader Snoke, and aspires to be as powerful as his grandfather, the Sith Lord Darth Vader.
Ren is eventually redeemed like his grandfather before him and helps Rey in her fight against her grandfather, the revived Emperor Palpatine.

Ren is also the master of the Knights of Ren, as well as a commander and later the Supreme Leader of the First Order, an organization spawned from the former Galactic Empire.
He appears in The Force Awakens, The Last Jedi (2017), The Resistance (2018), and The Rise of Skywalker (2019), as well as related media and merchandising.
Driver's performance received acclaim from critics and fans.
For his performance in The Force Awakens, Driver won the Saturn Award for Best Supporting Actor, making him the first Star Wars actor since Alec Guinness to win the award.
Kylo Ren is widely regarded as one of the greatest villains of the 2010s
==
Concept and creation ==
Abrams requested that Ren's mask be designed to be memorable to a child.
As late as March 2014, the film's main antagonist was only known to the production team as "Jedi Killer", and had gone through numerous unapproved design attempts.
The same month, Glyn Dillon's design for the character's costume was finally approved.
According to Abrams, "the design was meant to be a nod to the Vader mask," and concept designer Doug Chiang says that the character "takes on [the] persona of [Vader] to haunt Luke."
According to The Force Awakens costume designer Michael Kaplan,

I don't know if it was the kind of spaghetti type lines on it or what, but the next time J.J. came by that was what we presented to him
and he loved it.
Also the silver in those lines kind of reflects and changes color with the action.
You know, if he's standing in front of fire you see that, so it almost brings you into the mask.

Driver's casting in the film in an unnamed role was first announced on April 29, 2014.
Kylo Ren was first seen from behind, but still not named, in the 88-second
The Force Awakens teaser trailer released by Lucasfilm on November 28, 2014, wielding a jagged red lightsaber with a crossguard.
The name Kylo Ren, as well as the character's design, was revealed by Entertainment Weekly in a Lucasfilm-designed Topps-style trading card mock-up on December 11, 2014.
A May 2015 Vanity Fair photo shoot by Annie Leibovitz confirmed that Driver would be portraying Kylo.
According to other cast members, Driver is a method actor, which meant that he sometimes stayed in character on set as Ren and left his mask on between scenes.
Driver explained that his goal was "to forget you're in Star Wars and treat it like any other job that's filled with moments and problems," because from the perspective of the characters living within the film's universe, "Darth Vader is real."
==
Character ==
Abrams told Empire in August 2015, "Kylo Ren is not a Sith.
He works under Supreme Leader Snoke, who is a powerful figure on the Dark Side of the Force."
Abrams had previously told Entertainment Weekly that the character, "came to the name Kylo Ren when he joined a group called the Knights of Ren."
Robbie Collin of The Telegraph described Ren as "a hot-headed, radicalised Dark Side jihadi, whose red lightsaber splutters and crackles as violently as his temper".
Abrams noted, "The lightsaber is something that he built himself, and is as dangerous and as fierce and as ragged as the character."
The Telegraph also explains that Ren's wild and erratic temper and "angsty" instability make him dangerous.
Melissa Leon of The Daily Beast describes Ren's use of the Force as "formidable", citing his ability to stop a blaster shot mid-air, immobilize victims and probe their minds against their will.
Kasdan told Entertainment Weekly in August 2015, "I've written four Star Wars movies now, and there's never been a character quite like the one that Adam plays.
I think you're going to see something that's brand new to the saga," noting that the character is "full of emotion".
Abrams explained, "I think that what makes Ren so unique is that he isn't as fully formed as when we meet a character such as Darth Vader ...
He is not your prototypical mustache-twirling bad guy.
He is a little bit more complex than that."
Driver said in December 2015 that, despite the visual similarities to Darth Vader, Ren is "unlike any villain the franchise has seen".
He explained:

I feel there's a recklessness about him that's maybe not normally associated with the Dark Side.
You normally think of order, and structure, and full commitment and no hesitation ...
he's just a little bit more unpolished.
It's in his costume, in his lightsaber—how you kind of get the sense that it could just not work at any moment; that it could just blow up.
That’s kind of like a big metaphor for him.

Driver claimed that he was privy to several details of Kylo Ren's backstory during the making of the films.
According to Lev Grossman, who interviewed the actor in the lead-up to The Rise of Skywalker, Driver reported that “both Han Solo and Leia were way too self-absorbed and into this idea of themselves as heroes to really be attentive parents in the way a young and tender Kylo Ren really needed.”
The backstory of how Ben Solo became Kylo Ren was elaborated upon in a prequel graphic novel titled The Rise of Kylo Ren (written by Charles Soule and illustrated by Will Sliney), which was published and released by Marvel Comics from December 18, 2019 to March 11, 2020.Certain aspects of Kylo Ren's overall arc across the three films of the Sequel Trilogy were also known to Driver from the start of production on the first film.
He claimed that he “had one piece of information of where it was all going...and things were building towards that.”
He later clarified:
J.J. Abrams told me when I met him for the first time that I should imagine a journey of a character completely opposite to Darth Vader...
someone who starts as a child and becomes a man over the course of three movies.
He becomes closer to his convictions, becomes more assured about his choices, but has metaphorically and physically killed his father to become his own person.

When asked by IGN in December 2017 if he believed Kylo Ren was capable of redemption, The Last Jedi writer/director Rian Johnson replied, “Yeah...
Are you kidding?
Vader was worse than Kylo ever was, I think, and Vader got redeemed.”
Citing the complexity of the character, Johnson articulated, “I don’t see the point of trying to get behind his mask and learn more about him if all we’re going to learn is ‘Yeah, he’s just an evil bad guy that needs to be killed.’”
The Rise of Skywalker co-writer Chris Terrio also supported this position through comparing Kylo with Darth Vader.
According to Terrio, “Vader was complicit in genocide and cruelty and depravity.
Yet there is this inherent optimism in Star Wars that the light in you is never truly gone.
That you can still redeem yourself right up until the last minute – which, in Vader’s case, was literally true...
Leia never really gave up hope that Kylo could be redeemed, and she knew that Rey was probably the way that it would happen.”
Abrams further elaborated on this point:
Maybe it’s the optimist in me, but I would like to think that anyone, even someone who does the most horrendous things, is redeemable.
And certainly because his mother, Leia, is a believer that there is still light in him, it was hard to imagine that she would be wrong about him.

The Rise of Skywalker revealed that Kylo Ren and Rey were two halves of a “dyad” in the Force, which Terrio alternatively described as “sort of soulmate[s] in the Force”  and “twins of fate, twins of destiny.”

==
Appearances ==


===
The Force Awakens (2015) ===
Kylo Ren first appears in The Force Awakens as a commander in the First Order, a tyrannical regime that has risen from the remains of the Galactic Empire.
After arriving at Jakku to retrieve a map containing the coordinates where Luke Skywalker (Mark Hamill) is to be found, Ren kills an old priest named Lor San Tekka (Max von Sydow), and captures Resistance pilot Poe Dameron (Oscar Isaac), who has also been sent to recover the map by General Princess Leia Organa (Carrie Fisher).
Ren soon learns that the pilot had entrusted his astromech droid, BB-8, with the map.
Poe flees with the help of rogue stormtrooper Finn (John Boyega), who later finds BB-8, and the scavenger Rey (Daisy Ridley).
Finn, Rey, and BB-8 escape Jakku in the Millennium Falcon, and are soon intercepted by the ship's former owner, Han Solo (Harrison Ford), and his co-pilot Chewbacca (Peter Mayhew).

It is revealed that Ren is the son of Han and Leia, originally named Ben, and was once one of Luke's Jedi pupils.
He was corrupted to the dark side of the Force by the First Order's Supreme Leader Snoke (Andy Serkis), and helped destroy Luke's new Jedi Academy.
However, Ren still feels the pull of the light side of the Force and seeks the strength to overcome it from his grandfather Darth Vader, whose burnt helmet is in Ren's possession.
Arriving at Maz Kanata's (Lupita Nyong'o) castle on Takodana, Ren captures Rey, who he senses has seen the map.
While interrogating her, he realizes that she is strong with the Force, though unaware of it.
Rey finds herself able to resist his powers and experience Ren's emotions, and confronts him over his fear that he will never be as powerful as his grandfather.
She later uses the "Jedi mind trick" to compel her stormtrooper guard to let her escape.
Han arrives at the First Order's superweapon, Starkiller Base, as part of the Resistance's plan to destroy it.

After Han plants explosives to destroy the base, he confronts Ren—calling him by his real name, Ben—and implores him to abandon the dark side, warning him that Snoke will kill him once he has control of the galaxy.
Ren tells Han he feels conflicted, and asks his father for help, which Han promises to give; Ren then ignites his lightsaber, impaling and killing Han.
An enraged Chewbacca fires at Ren, wounding him.
As Finn and Rey flee the damaged base, Ren follows and confronts them.
Finn fights Ren with Anakin Skywalker's recovered lightsaber, but Ren overpowers and severely wounds him.
Rey then takes up the lightsaber and, using the Force, begins to overcome Ren, striking him on the face with the lightsaber.
Before the duel is finished, they are separated by a seismic fissure created by the collapsing base.
Rey and the others escape as Snoke orders General Hux (Domnhall Gleeson) to evacuate the base and bring Ren to him to complete his training.

===
The Last Jedi (2017) ===
Ren's inner conflict continues into The Last Jedi, particularly through his conversations with Rey, with whom he connects through the Force.
Rey learns from Luke why Ben Solo turned to the dark side:
Luke had seen a vision of the destruction Ben would cause and was briefly tempted to kill him in his sleep; when Ben awoke to see Luke with his lightsaber drawn, he turned on his uncle and apparently destroyed the Jedi Temple.
Rey believes that there is still good in Ren, and resolves to bring him back to the light side.

Meanwhile, Ren is reproached by Snoke for his failure to defeat Rey, and Ren tries to prove himself by leading an attack on a lead Resistance starship.
He hesitates to destroy it after sensing his mother's presence, but his wingmen destroy the ship's bridge, almost killing Leia.
Upon Rey's arrival, Ren captures her and brings her to Snoke, who tortures her for Luke's location before ordering Ren to kill her.
Instead of complying, Ren uses the Force to ignite Luke's lightsaber at Snoke's side and cut him in half, and subsequently slays Snoke's royal guard with Rey's assistance.
After the guards are slain, Ren reveals to Rey his goal to create a new order in the galaxy, separate from the legacies created by Snoke and Luke, and beseeches Rey to join him.
He forces her to acknowledge that her parents abandoned her, and tells her that he is the only one who truly cares about her.
Rey refuses to join him, realizing that Ren will not turn back to the light side; the two briefly struggle over Anakin's lightsaber with the Force, resulting in the weapon breaking in half and knocking both warriors unconscious.

After Rey escapes, Ren frames her for Snoke's assassination, uses the Force to choke Hux until he acknowledges Ren as the new Supreme Leader of the First Order, and orders his forces to attack the Resistance base on Crait.
When Luke appears during the attack, Ren orders his men to fire on him, to no effect; Luke remains standing, revealing that he is only present as a Force projection, serving as a distraction to allow the Resistance to escape from the First Order.
After Luke vanishes, the First Order storms the base, but the Resistance has already evacuated.
Ren shares a final look with Rey through the Force before Rey slams the door to the Millennium Falcon and escapes with the Resistance.

===
The Rise of Kylo Ren (2019–2020) ===
Ren's past as Ben Solo is depicted in The Rise of Kylo Ren.
As a child, he is trained as a Jedi by his uncle Luke Skywalker alongside his fellow students Voe, Hennix, and his best friend Tai; Voe grows jealous of Ben for his superior Force capability and Luke's perceived favoritism and nepotism.
On a mission to the planet Elphrona to investigate an ancient Jedi outpost with Luke and Lor San Tekka, Ben telepathically communicates with Snoke, whom Luke had recently fought, for which Ben respects him.
Upon arriving on the planet, the trio encounters the Knights of Ren, a group of Force-wielding mercenaries searching the ruins for artifacts.
After a brief confrontation between the group and Luke, their leader, Ren, stops the proceedings by activating a kill switch on his lightsaber.
After he and Luke agreeing to a truce, Ren unmasks and, placing his mask on the ground, offers Ben an open invitation to the group's ranks if he ever desires in the future, sensing great capability for "the Shadow" within him.

Several years later, after collapsing his hut on his uncle Luke after the latter apparently tried to kill him in his sleep, Ben yells towards the Jedi Temple in outrage at Luke's actions and is terrified when a bolt of lightning strikes, destroying it.
Later that night, Voe, Hennix, Tai return from off-planet to find Ben before the burning Temple.
After they are unable to sense Luke's presence, Ben elaborates on the confrontation, believing himself to have killed Luke, and states that he intends to leave the planet.
Believing Ben to be responsible for the Temple's destruction, Voe attacks Ben only to be easily subdued with Hennix and Tai, and Ben leaves the planet on a nearby shuttle, with the trio in close pursuit.
After considering returning to his mother on Hosnian Prime, Ben instead decides to meet Snoke in person after receiving another message from him.
Scarred from a previous encounter with Luke, Snoke encourages Ben to seek out the Knights of Ren.
Traveling to the outpost on Elphrona, Ben retrieves Ren's mask and puts it on, putting the pair in communication.
After mentioning Snoke, Ren invites Ben to meet the Knights on Vanrak, before he is confronted by Voe, having followed him via a tracker in his ship provided by Hennix.

Refusing to fight, only to defend himself from Voe's attacks, Ben uses the Force to catch her after she falls off of a building, witnessed by Tai.
However, Hennix, believing Ben to have killed her, throws his lightsaber in a lethal spin at Ben; in deflecting it, Hennix is bisected.
Leaving, Ben collapses the outpost around Voe and Tai to subdue them and leaves the planet.
Later, Ben meets with Ren and his Knights, who informs him he will need to provide a "good death" for membership.
After telling him of the encounter with Hennix, Ren states that Ben was not responsible for it, and therefore ineligible for membership, although he offers him another chance due to Snoke having vouched for him.
Providing him a uniform, the group proceeds to the Mine Moon of Mimban, where Ben assists the Knights in stealing an artifact known as the Mindsplinter from miners using a variation of the Jedi mind trick taught to him by Snoke.
Ben is horrified when the Knights subsequently execute the smugglers after Ren had promised Ben to merely release them.
Suddenly, Voe and Tai, having followed Ben from Tai reading his mind, arrive.
Voe attacks the Knights of Ren, while Tai reasons with Ben over his decision to leave, and the pair cease fighting.
Witnessing this, Ren snaps Tai's neck, killing him, telling Ben that Snoke was wrong and that he doesn't wish to "live in the shadow".
Declaring that "I am the Shadow", an enraged Ben takes up Tai's lightsaber and his own and duels Ren.
While doing so, Rey senses Ben from across the galaxy without knowing why, Ben's mother Leia senses his fall, Snoke calls out his praises and Palpatine is revealed to be manipulating both Snoke and Ben, and to have destroyed the Jedi Temple, although Ben remains unaware of this.
The duel culminates in Ben impaling Ren, providing him the "good death" he asked for before sending the Knights and Voe flying.

Shocked at Ben killing Ren, Voe attempts to reach for her lightsaber, only for it to be taken by Ben.
Deriding her role in Hennix's and Tai's deaths and declaring that she is "not a Jedi", Ben knights Voe with Ren's lightsaber, before turning to find the Knights of Ren kneeling before him, having accepted him as their new leader.
Later, on Ren's ship, Ben crushes the Kyber crystal from his own lightsaber in his bare hand and forges himself a new crossguard lightsaber in the image of one he had seen on Elphrona, taking the name Kylo Ren, derived from "Skywalker" and "Solo".
===
The Rise of Skywalker (2019) ===
In The Rise of Skywalker, Ren has been ruling as the Supreme Leader of the First Order for a year.
In the film's beginning, Ren searches for a Sith Wayfinder to lead him to the Sith planet Exegol, with the hopes of killing the resurrected Emperor Palpatine (Ian McDiarmid) as a show of his power.
When Ren finds the Wayfinder and arrives on Exegol, Palpatine reveals that he has been manipulating Ren and the First Order, having created Snoke as a means of turning Ren to the dark side.
Palpatine unveils the Final Order, a massive armada of planet-killing Star Destroyers.
Palpatine offers the armada to Ren in a bid to form a new Empire—with Ren as Emperor—on the condition that he kill Rey.

Ren searches the galaxy for Rey and continues corresponding with her through the Force to discern her location.
Rey has been searching for a second Wayfinder; Ren tries to stop her from finding it.
Eventually, Ren informs Rey that she is Palpatine's granddaughter, and furthermore, they are a dyad in the Force with extremely powerful potential when joined together.
He urges her once more to take his hand and to overthrow Palpatine together.
Rey refuses, but Ren is unwilling to kill her and follows her to Kef Bir, the location of the second Wayfinder.
Meeting her on the wreckage of the second Death Star, Ren destroys Rey's Wayfinder and duels her.
The duel ends with Rey impaling Ren, who had been distracted by his dying mother, Leia, reaching out to him through the Force.
A guilt-ridden Rey (also sensing Leia's death) uses the Force to heal Ren and leaves aboard his ship, after telling him that she wanted to take Ben Solo's hand, but not Kylo Ren's.
Alone on the wreckage, Ren converses with a memory of his father, Han Solo; he throws away his lightsaber, renouncing his role as Supreme Leader and reclaiming his old identity of Ben Solo.

Ben rushes to help Rey defeat Palpatine on Exegol.
Rey senses his presence and uses their Force connection to give him Anakin's lightsaber, which Ben uses to defeat the Knights of Ren.
Palpatine then senses Rey and Ben's connection as a dyad of the Force, and absorbs their energy to restore his full power, before casting Ben into an abyss.
However, Rey manages to defeat and kill Palpatine before dying from the effort.
Ben climbs out of the abyss and finds Rey's inert body.
Ben manages to transfer all of his life essence into her, successfully resuscitating her but sacrificing his own life in the process.
They share a passionate kiss before Ben dies peacefully in Rey's arms.
His body fades away simultaneously with his mother's, becoming one with the Force.

===
Related works and promotional material ===
Kylo Ren is a point of view character in the 2015, 2017, and 2019 novelizations of the Star Wars sequel trilogy by Alan Dean Foster, Jason Fry, and Rae Carson.

Kylo is a playable character in the 2015
The Force Awakens add-on to the Disney Infinity 3.0 video game, with an Infinity character figurine available separately.
He is also a character in the strategy video game
Star Wars: Force Arena.
Hasbro has released a 3 3⁄4-inch (9.5 cm)
Kylo Ren action figure, and a 6-inch (15 cm) figure in their Black Series line.
He is also featured in the Lego Star Wars playsets Kylo Ren's Command Shuttle (2015) and Battle on Takodana (2016), as well as a Lego Buildable Figure.
The Lego version of Kylo also appears in the 2016 short form animated series Lego Star Wars: The Resistance Rises, and as a playable character in Lego Star Wars: The Force Awakens.
In January 2016, Driver reprised the role for a Star Wars/Undercover Boss sketch on Saturday Night Live, with Kylo Ren disguising himself as a radar technician named "Matt" to determine what the Starkiller Base employees really think of him.
Driver again reprised the role in January 2020 for a follow-up Saturday Night Live sketch titled “Undercover Boss:
Where Are They Now?”
in which Kylo goes undercover as “Randy,” an entry-level intern on a star destroyer.
In the 2017 Chuck Wendig novel Star Wars: Aftermath: Empire's End, Ben Solo is stated as having been born on the planet Chandrila on the same day as a peace treaty is signed between the remnants of the Empire and the New Galactic Republic (about a year after Return of the Jedi, or 29 years before The Force Awakens).
Kylo Ren is also mentioned in the 2017 novel Star Wars: Phasma, which takes place before The Force Awakens.

Kylo appears in Star Wars Battlefront II, voiced by Matthew Wood and Roger Craig Smith, masked and unmasked respectively.
In the game, Kylo interrogates Del Meeko about Lor San Tekka's location (who possess the map to Luke Skywalker) using his Force abilities.
When Del finally relents and reveals the map and Lor San Tekka's location, Kylo leaves him for Hask, Del's former comrade in Inferno Squad.
Kylo Ren (voiced once again by Matthew Wood) also appears in the Star Wars:
Resistance series finale episode
"The Escape", where he kills Agent Tierny for failing to destroy the Colossus Resistance.

Matthew Wood also portrayed General Grievous in both Star Wars:
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith and the TV series
Star Wars: The Clone Wars.

Kylo Ren is also one of the numerous voices heard in the fourth and final season of Star Wars: Rebels in the episode "A World Between Worlds", with an excerpt of Driver's dialogue from The Force Awakens being used.
Kylo Ren appears as a walk-around character within Star Wars: Galaxy's Edge at Disneyland and Disney's Hollywood Studios.
The character appears during Star Tours – The Adventures Continue and
Star Wars:
Rise of the Resistance, with the latter featuring the character in audio-animatronic form with Driver providing the voice.
On November 28, 2019, Ichikawa Ebizō XI starred as Kairennosuke in Star Wars Kabuki: Kairennosuke and the Three Shining Swords (スター・ウォーズ歌舞伎〜煉之介光刃三本〜, Sutā Uōzu Kabuki ~Rennosuke
Kōjin San-pon~)
, a kabuki production that re-enacted key events of Kylo Ren in The Force Awakens and The Last Jedi.

== Reception ==
The character and Driver's portrayal have received critical acclaim; Driver won the 2016 Saturn Award for Best Supporting Actor for his portrayal.
In January 2018, Kylo was voted seventh greatest movie villain of all time by the readers of Empire.

Many reviewers commended Ren's conflicted nature and depth, as well as his costume design, and noted there were many places the character could be taken in future installments.
Peter Bradshaw of The Guardian praised the character and the actor alike, saying, "He is gorgeously cruel, spiteful and capricious – and unlike the Vader of old, he is given to petulant temper tantrums, with his lightsaber drawn."
Terri Schwartz of IGN also called Driver's performance "spectacular", noting that "his performance adds great depth to a character who could have come off as one-dimensional, and the implications of his arc leave a viewer with plenty to think about after they leave the theater."

Collin wrote, "To describe Kylo Ren as this film's Vader would be accurate in a sense ...
But it would also be to undersell the deep ingenuity with which this astonishing character has been crafted by Abrams, Kasdan and Arndt, and also the wells of emotional tumult Driver invests in him.
"
Comparing the character to the one-note Vader of the 1977 film, Melissa Leon calls Ren "a living battleground between darkness and light, making him a far more resonant and familiar portrayal of that struggle than we've ever seen in Star Wars ...
[which] makes him a far more interesting villain.
"
Abrams told Entertainment Weekly, "it was a great joy to work with Adam Driver on this role, because he threw himself into it in a deep and remarkable way."
Todd McCarthy of The Hollywood Reporter noted, "Ren is given a pronounced inferiority complex, a clever bad guy twist that could be taken to interesting places both in the writing and performance."
Peter Travers of Rolling Stone wrote, "The bald-faced attempt to clone Vader, one of the greatest badasses in film history, is clankingly obvious, but Driver, masked and unmasked, gives him hypnotic and haunting contours."
Kyle Buchanan of Vulture.com was underwhelmed by the reveal of Driver under the mask.
Leon, however, argued:

But that face—that of a normal, vulnerable young man—is the most subversively terrifying thing about J. J. Abrams' reimagining of A New Hope.
Rather than pure evil, Ren is something far more familiar: He is human.
Just like the real-life young men with minds clouded by fear, hate, and anger who commit unspeakable acts in our world every day ...
all the visual cues that leave the character open to criticisms of not being "evil" enough—are all signs of Ren's struggle between the Dark Side and the Light.

Some viewers noted that Ren's character arc shares similarities with that of the Star Wars Expanded Universe character Jacen Solo, the son of Han Solo and Princess Leia who threatens the galaxy as a fallen Jedi.
Additionally, critics have noted a resemblance between Ren's character design and that of Revan, the protagonist of Knights of the Old Republic.

==
Family tree ==


==
References ==
Footnotes
Citations


===
Sources ===
Szostak, Phil (2015).
The Art of Star Wars: The Force Awakens.
Abrams Books.
ISBN 978-1419717802.

Szostak, Phil (2017).
The Art of Star Wars: The Last Jedi.
Abrams Books.
ISBN 978-1419727054.

Szostak, Phil (2019).
The Art of Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker.
Abrams Books.
ISBN 978-1419740381.

Wendig, Chuck (2017).
Star Wars:
Aftermath: Empire's End.
Del Rey.
ISBN 9781101966976.

==
Further reading ==
Scoville, Max (December 20, 2017). "
Star Wars:
Hey, What's Up With The Knights of Ren?".
IGN.

==
External links ==
 Media related to Kylo Ren at Wikimedia Commons
Kylo Ren in the StarWars.com Databank
Kylo Ren on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Kylo Ren on IMDb
Padmé Amidala Naberrie is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise, appearing in the prequel trilogy portrayed by Natalie Portman.
First indirectly mentioned in Return of the Jedi, she is introduced in The Phantom Menace as the teenage Queen of Naboo, and after her reign, becomes a senator and an anti-war spokesperson in the Galactic Senate.
She secretly marries Jedi Knight Anakin Skywalker then later gives birth to twins Luke Skywalker and Leia Organa.
Anakin's fear of losing Padmé plays a part in driving him to the dark side of the Force and becoming Darth Vader.

Despite mixed reaction to the character's portrayal, the role helped Natalie Portman gain international recognition.
In addition to being one of three primary characters in the prequel trilogy, Padmé has also appeared in other Star Wars media such as The Clone Wars.

==
Concept and creation ==
In initial drafts of the Star Wars story, "Leia is the daughter of Owen Lars and his wife Beru and seems to be Luke's cousin—together they visit the grave of his mother, who perished with his father on a planet destroyed by the Death Star.
"
In an interview, Lucas answered a question about the development of characters like Obi-Wan Kenobi, Luke, and Leia; their mother was not a factor:
The first [version] talked about a princess and an old general.
The second version involved a father, his son, and his daughter; the daughter was the heroine of the film.
Now the daughter has become Luke, Mark Hamill's character.

Film historian Laurent Bouzereau reports that the second draft of the screenplay for Return of the Jedi contained dialogue in which Obi-Wan explains to Luke that he has a twin sister.
She and their mother were "sent to the protection of friends in a distant system.
The mother died shortly thereafter, and Luke's sister was adopted by Ben's friends, the governor of Alderaan and his wife.
"
Lucas is quoted as saying:

The part that I never really developed is the death of Luke and Leia's mother.
I had a backstory for her in earlier drafts, but it basically didn't survive.
When I got to Jedi, I wanted one of the kids to have some kind of memory of her because she will be a key figure in the new episodes
I'm writing.
But I really debated whether or not Leia should remember her.

When Lucas drafted the script for The Phantom Menace, he envisioned a "link between Padmé and Princess Leia, the daughter who follows so closely in her footsteps."
According to Natalie Portman, "It definitely did come into play
how strong and smart a character
Carrie Fisher portrayed, because I think that a lot of that is passed on from parent to child.
I think George wrote Amidala as a strong, smart character, but it helped to know that I had this great woman before me who had portrayed her character as a fiery woman."
Paul McDonald notes that there are "inevitable comparisons" between the two characters: "both develop soft spots for rogue pilots, and both have a knack for slipping into and out of stilted British accents.
"
Padmé and Leia are also both skilled with a blaster, rarely missing a shot.

===
Casting ===
George Lucas, Rick McCallum, and casting director Robin Gurland auditioned over 200 actresses for the part of Padmé Amidala.
They chose 16-year-old actress Natalie Portman to play the role.
According to The Phantom Menace production notes, "The role required a young woman who could be believable as the ruler of that planet, but at the same time be vulnerable and open."
Portman's performances in The Professional (1994) and Beautiful Girls (1996) impressed Lucas.
He stated, "I was looking for someone who was young, strong, along the lines of Leia.
Natalie embodied all those traits and more.
"Portman was unfamiliar with Star Wars at the time of her casting.
She said, "My cousins had always been obsessed with the films, yet I hadn't even seen them before I got the part.
When it all happened for me, my cousins were exclaiming, 'Oh, my God, you're in Star Wars!'
"
She told a CNN interviewer, "I really wasn't aware of how big a deal Star Wars was ... and when I saw the films, I really liked them, but I still didn't really understand how many ... were passionate fans of this film.
"
Portman was, however, enthusiastic over being cast as the queen of Naboo, a character she expected to become a role model: "It was wonderful playing a young queen with so much power.
I think it will be good for young women to see a strong woman of action who is also smart and a leader.
"In
The Phantom Menace, Portman had to portray a character younger than herself.
In Attack of the Clones, however, her character had aged 10 years.
Portman had aged only three years between the two films.
She remarks, "[Lucas] wants to make sure I seem older than Anakin in Attack of the Clones, so it's believable that I can be bossing him around, and he's a little intimidated.
She looks at him as a little boy – at least for the first half of the film."
===
Costumes ===
An extensive wardrobe was designed for Padmé Amidala by Lucasfilm concept artists and costume designers.
Like Leia Organa, one of the inspirations for Padmé was the Flash Gordon character Dale Arden.
The wardrobe in The Phantom Menace was designed by concept artist Iain McCaig and costume designer Trisha Biggar; concept artist Dermot Power joined McCaig and Biggar in the design process of Attack of the Clones.
Biggar worked as costume designer on the three films.
Many costumes were inspired by the historical royal fashions of different cultures.
For example, in The Phantom Menace, the dress which Padmé wears when addressing the Senate is based on Mongolian imperial fashion worn by Empress Dondogdulam, the wife of Bogd Khan, and other monarchs into the early 20th century.
Padmé's travel gown in Attack of the Clones is based on 17th-century Russian fashion photographed on Grand Duchess Xenia Alexandrovna at the Romanov Anniversary Ball in 1903.The costumes of the prequel trilogy are purposefully more elaborate than those of the original trilogy.
Lucas asserts that galactic society in the prequels is much more sophisticated.
Commenting on the disparities between the two trilogies, Carrie Fisher mused, "Harrison Ford wears the same outfit for three flicks, and I was complaining that I wear, like, six outfits.
And my mother – Natalie Portman – she wears three million.
She walks through a doorway and there's another outfit.
It's like the Liberace of sci-fi changing of clothes."
Trisha Biggar reveals that originally there were only three costumes planned for Amidala in The Phantom Menace, but "[Lucas] decided that every time we saw [her]
she was going to have a different costume.
"
Lucas explains, "Someone of that stature would automatically be changing their costumes to fit the occasion."
Aesthetics aside, the wardrobe was designed to reflect key plot developments.
In Attack of the Clones, Lucas wanted Padmé's wardrobe to mirror the romantic elements of the film.
He suggested that her costumes be more "sultry in nature."
Trisha Biggar notes that Lucas wanted her to appear "sexy, gorgeous, and young in skimpy clothes."
Portman laughs, "I got over the hump of 18
so I'm allowed to show tummy now
, I guess", so during the battle of Geonosis the bottom part of her top is ripped off revealing her midriff.
For Revenge of the Sith, Biggar says, "We knew that Padmé was going to be pregnant through the whole film, and nobody in the outside world could know that.
Because she's pregnant, I wanted a soft quality to be apparent in the fabrics that were used.
"Some of the costumes created by Biggar's staff did not appear in the final version of the films.
In Revenge of the Sith, for example, a multi-colored "Peacock Gown" and a "Green Cut Velvet Robe" worn by Padmé in scenes featuring the Delegation of 2000 were deleted during post-production.
Biggar remarks that the Peacock Gown had been one of her favorite designs and that much time and money had been invested in these particular costumes.
Ultimately, the Peacock Gown would be used only for the film's theatrical poster.
The velvet robe was ultimately re-used for a short scene filmed during pick-up photography, thus appearing in the film, and features on the DVD cover art.

Many of Padmé's costumes in The Phantom Menace were featured in the Japanese magazine High Fashion in 1999 and the Attack of the Clones costumes were in Vogue in 2002.
The costumes went on display in the 2005 exhibit Dressing A Galaxy:
The Costumes of Star Wars at the Fashion Institute of Design & Merchandising (FIDM) in Los Angeles.
Trisha Biggar won a Saturn Award for Best Costumes in 2000 for The Phantom Menace and in 2003 for Attack of the Clones.
She was nominated in 2006 for Revenge of the Sith, but lost to Isis Mussenden, costume designer for The Chronicles of Narnia: The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe (2005).

===
Character overview ===
Padmé Amidala is depicted in Star Wars fiction as beautiful and graceful.
In Cloak of Deception, she is described as having "a slight figure and a lovely, feminine face.
She was remarkably solemn for one so young.
It was clear that she took her responsibilities with the utmost seriousness."
Terry Brooks details the alien Nute Gunray's reaction to her appearance: "
She was considered beautiful, Gunray had been told, but he had no sense of human beauty and by Neimoidian standards she was simply colorless and small-featured."
Brooks writes that she is "young, beautiful, and serene.
"The
Star Wars Databank describes her as "one of Naboo's best and brightest" and "interested in public service".
She demonstrates a devotion to the disadvantaged and deprived beings of the galaxy.
Her childhood and adolescence is sacrificed to public service.
In the Attack of the Clones novelization, Padmé's sister Sola Naberrie tells her, "You're so tied up in your responsibilities that you don't give any weight to your desires.
"Padmé relies on diplomacy to resolve disputes, often appearing as a pacifist.
She is not, however, an advocate of appeasement, as she is willing to use "aggressive negotiations" to preserve democracy.
The Star Wars Databank notes, "Despite her initial objections to a Republic army, Padmé nonetheless fought alongside the newly created clone troopers against the Separatist droid forces."
Film critics Dominique Mainon and James Ursini classify her as a "modern Amazon," a reference to the warrior women of ancient Greek mythology.
Her combat skills are explored further through the Star Wars universe.
In Star Wars: Episode II – Attack of the Clones she fights squads of battle droids with hand-to-hand combat and a blaster.
She is an expert markswoman; in the Star Wars: The Clone Wars episode "Assassin", she outguns bounty hunter Aurra Sing.

As a ruler and politician, Padmé is distrustful of bureaucracy, opposed to corruption, and a firm believer in democracy and the rule of law.
She tells Anakin, "Popular rule is not democracy ....
It gives the people what they want, not what they need."
According to Mainon and Ursini, "she tried to preach compromise and reason, [but]
the disarray within the [Republic] ... led her to doubt the senate's effectiveness.
"
Her loyalty remains with the Republic until she suspects it no longer represents the democratic principles she espouses.
In the novelization of Revenge of the Sith, Padmé advises Senator Bail Organa and Mon Mothma, the founders of what will become the Rebel Alliance, to "Be good little Senators.
Mind your manners and keep your heads down.
And keep doing ...
all those things we can't talk about.
"Padmé is sometimes mysterious and deceptive.
She is described in Brooks' The Phantom Menace novelization as a "chameleon of sorts, masking herself to the world at large and finding companionship almost exclusively with a cadre of handmaidens who were always with her."
Her decision to quietly marry Anakin and secret discussions with other senators about Palpatine add to the character's duplicity.
Paul F. McDonald of Space.com observes, "Amidala ...
embod[ies]
many of the dualities that inform Episode I—war and peace, queen and commoner, form and substance.
Unlike other characters, whose personalities are divided and usually warring against one another, her dual nature works to her advantage."
He explains, "Amidala can be cold and commanding when she needs to be, or warm and loving as Padmé."
==
Appearances ==


===
Original trilogy ===


===
=
Return of the Jedi ====
Return of the Jedi, the final film in the original trilogy, alludes to the character.
While in the Ewok village on the forest moon of Endor, Luke Skywalker (Mark Hamill) asks if Princess Leia (Carrie Fisher) remembers their real mother.
Leia answers that "she died when I was very young" and also says that "she was very beautiful...
kind... but sad", while Luke confesses to have no memories of their mother.
An extended scene of Return of the Jedi expands on the fate of Luke and Leia's (then-unnamed) mother.

===
Prequel trilogy ===


====
The Phantom Menace ====
Padmé Amidala makes her first film appearance in The Phantom Menace.
She is introduced as the recently elected 14-year-old queen of Naboo, dedicated to ending the planet's occupation by the Trade Federation.
She attempts to deal directly with Federation Viceroy Nute Gunray (Silas Carson), who attempts to force her to sign a treaty which would legitimize the Trade Federation's occupation of Naboo.
Padmé escapes from Naboo with the help of Jedi Master Qui-Gon Jinn (Liam Neeson) and his Padawan Obi-Wan Kenobi (Ewan McGregor), but they are forced to land on the desert planet of Tatooine after the ship's hyperdrive generator malfunctions.
Disguised as a handmaiden, Padmé meets nine-year-old slave Anakin Skywalker (Jake Lloyd) and his mother Shmi (Pernilla August).
She finds Anakin strange but quite charming.
She witnesses Anakin win the podrace at the Boonta Eve Classic that both aids her mission to Coruscant and secures his freedom.
During their journey from Tatooine to Coruscant she and Anakin bond with her comforting him over his sadness at being separated from his mother and him giving her a hand-carved charm on a leather necklace which he tells her is for good luck.

Arriving on Coruscant, Padmé consults with Senator Palpatine (Ian McDiarmid), who encourages her to appeal to the Senate to resolve Naboo's dispute with the Trade Federation.
Palpatine persuades her to make a motion in the Senate to have Supreme Chancellor Finis Valorum (Terence Stamp) voted out from office, which later enables Palpatine to be elected in his place.
Padmé returns to Naboo to fight for her planet's freedom, enlisting the aid of Jar Jar Binks (Ahmed Best) and his Gungan tribe and having her handmaiden Sabé (Keira Knightley) pose as her.
As Sabé attempts a peace deal between Naboo and the Gungans, Padmé intervenes and reveals her true identity.
The Gungans agree to help and offer a diversion to lure the droid armies away from the palace.
Once in the palace, Padmé's forces storm the palace and capture Gunray, ending the trade blockade of Naboo once and for all.
A celebration is held to announce the unity between Naboo and the Gungans.

====
Attack of the Clones ====
Padmé Amidala makes her second film appearance in Attack of the Clones, which is set 10 years later.
Now holding office as Senator following her term as queen, she represents Naboo in the Galactic Senate and leads a faction opposed to the Military Creation Act that would create an army of clones for the Republic, which has been threatened by a growing Separatist movement.
As she arrives on Coruscant to cast her vote, assassins hired by the Separatists an unsuccessful attempt on her life.
Jedi Knight Obi-Wan Kenobi and Padawan Anakin Skywalker (Hayden Christensen) are assigned to protect Padmé.
Palpatine sends Padmé into hiding on Naboo, where she and Anakin struggle to maintain a platonic relationship despite their obvious mutual attraction.
In a deleted scene, she introduces Anakin to her parents, Ruwee (Graeme Blundell) and Jobal Naberrie (Trisha Noble), and informs him of her charitable work with the Refugee Relief Movement, a galaxy-wide disaster relief and resettlement organization.

When Anakin has a vision of his mother in danger, Padmé accompanies him to Tatooine in a failed attempt to rescue Shmi from a band of Tusken Raiders.
Anakin returns with Shmi's body and confesses to Padmé that he has slaughtered the entire Tusken tribe out of revenge.
Padmé is troubled by what Anakin has done, but nevertheless comforts him.
After they receive a message from Obi-Wan on the planet
Geonosis, Padmé and Anakin rush to his aid, only to be captured themselves and condemned to death in a Geonosian coliseum by Separatist leader and Sith Lord Count Dooku
(Christopher Lee).
They declare their love to each other, just before they are saved at the last minute by Jedi Masters Mace Windu (Samuel L. Jackson)
and Yoda (Frank Oz) leading an army of Jedi and clone troopers, thus marking the beginning of the Clone Wars.
Afterwards, Padmé and Anakin are married in a secret ceremony on Naboo, with R2-D2 (Kenny Baker) and C-3PO (Anthony Daniels) as witnesses.

====
Revenge of the Sith ====
Padmé Amidala makes her third film appearance in Revenge of the Sith, which is set three years after the beginning of the Clone Wars.
After Anakin returns from rescuing Palpatine, she informs him that she is pregnant.
Padmé detects changes in Anakin after he begins having prophetic visions of her dying in childbirth.
Eventually, Palpatine - who is secretly the Sith lord Darth Sidious - plays on Anakin's fears by saying that the dark side of the Force holds the power to save Padmé, which ultimately leads to Anakin becoming Palpatine's apprentice, Darth Vader.
Meanwhile, Padmé watches with increasing suspicion as Palpatine uses the Clone Wars as an excuse to take near-total control of the Senate and judiciary.
In another deleted scene, Padmé is seen as a dissenter in Palpatine's government and an early constituting member of the Alliance to Restore the Republic, joined by senators Bail Organa (Jimmy Smits) and Mon Mothma (Genevieve O'Reilly).

As Palpatine declares martial law by transforming the Republic into the Galactic Empire and declaring himself Emperor, Padmé remarks to Organa: "
So this is how liberty dies—with thunderous applause.
"
Obi-Wan informs Padmé that Anakin has fallen to the dark side of the Force and, as Palpatine's new Sith apprentice Darth Vader, killed everyone in the Jedi Temple, including children.
Unable to believe this, Padmé travels to the volcanic planet Mustafar, where Vader had gone to assassinate the Separatist leaders , unaware that Obi-Wan has stowed away aboard her ship.
Padmé begs Vader to escape Palpatine's grasp with her, but Vader insists that, together, they can overthrow Palpatine and rule the galaxy.
Padmé recoils in horror, but still tries to persuade him to abandon the dark side.
When Obi-Wan emerges from her ship, Vader accuses Padmé of betrayal and uses the Force to choke her into unconsciousness.

After Obi-Wan defeats Darth Vader in a lightsaber duel and remorsefully leaves him for dead, he brings Padmé to the secret asteroid base Polis Massa.
While physically healthy, Padmé is said to have "lost her will to live" after Vader's descent, and dies soon after delivering twins, Luke and Leia.
Just prior to her death, Padmé insists to Obi-Wan that she knows "there is still good" in Vader, which is proven true many years later after he redeems himself to save Luke by throwing the emperor to his death at the cost of his life.
After Padmé's body is altered to appear still pregnant and given an elaborate funeral ceremony on Naboo, on Yoda's command, her twins are separated to be hidden from the Empire:
Leia is adopted by Organa and his wife on Alderaan to be raised as a princess, while Obi-Wan brings Luke to Tatooine, where the boy is to be raised by Vader's stepbrother Owen Lars (Joel Edgerton) and his wife Beru (Bonnie Piesse) and he exiles himself there to watch over the boy and train him when the time is right.
===
Animated series ===


====
The Clone Wars ====
Padmé Amidala (voiced by Catherine Taber) makes her fourth film appearance in Star Wars: The Clone Wars.
While Anakin (voiced by Matt Lanter) and his Padawan Ahsoka Tano (voiced by Ashley Eckstein) search for Jabba the Hutt's son Rotta, Padmé meets Jabba's uncle Ziro the Hutt (voiced by Corey Burton) at his palace on Coruscant to convince him to side with the Jedi.
After Ziro forcibly removes Padmé, she escapes and eavesdrops on his communication with Count Dooku and the Separatists about an elaborate scheme to kill Rotta, frame the Jedi for his murder and force Jabba to attempt revenge, leaving Ziro as the Hutts' ruler.
After being discovered, Dooku suggests Ziro collect the bounty placed on her head.
When battle droids confiscate Padmé's comlink and blaster, she outwits and tricks one into activating her comlink as C-3PO is attempting to contact her before a droid smashes the device.
C-3PO leads a squad of Coruscant Guard troopers to rescue her.
Padmé then contacts Jabba just as the Hutt is about to execute Anakin and Ahsoka, and forces Ziro to confess his betrayal to Jabba.
Padmé proceeds to negotiate an alliance between the Republic and the Hutts which would allow Republic warships to use unknown Hutt hyperspace lanes.

In the subsequent TV series, Padmé is mostly portrayed working in the Senate toward a peaceful resolution to the Clone Wars, although a few episodes have portrayed her fighting the Separatists alongside Anakin, Ahsoka and Jar Jar Binks.
She has appeared in seven episodes in the first season and third season, four episodes in the second season, nine episodes in the fourth season, and one episode in the fifth season.
A trilogy of episodes were set with her as the main focus in which she meets with her old friend Rush Clovis (voiced by Robin Atkin Downes), causing Anakin to become jealous; these episodes were released in season six, known as The Lost Missions.

====
Forces of Destiny (2017) ====
Padmé appears in the micro-series Star Wars: Forces of Destiny, again voiced by Catherine Taber.

===
Literature ===
The novelizations of the Star Wars prequel films introduced material about Padmé Amidala that was not included in the films.
Terry Brooks' The Phantom Menace (1999) includes a discussion between Qui-Gon and Obi-Wan in which the former describes the then-queen of Naboo as "something of an unknown" before the Trade Federation blockade.
In the Attack of the Clones (2002) adaptation by R. A. Salvatore, there is a detailed conversation between Padmé and her sister Sola Naberrie shortly after Queen Jamillia appoints her senator.
Sola chides her for ignoring her personal life: "What about Padmé Amidala?
Have you even thought about what might make your life better?"
Matthew Stover's Revenge of the Sith (2005) elaborates upon Padmé's role in the formation of the Rebel Alliance.
Stover narrates Darth Vader's reaction to the death of his wife:
Vader thinks to himself, "You killed her because, finally, when you could have saved her, when you could have gone away with her, when you could have been thinking about her, you were thinking about yourself.
"Queen's Shadow, a novel by E. K. Johnston released on March 5, 2019, features Padmé as the main character, as well as several of her handmaidens—especially Sabé.
Set four years after the events of The Phantom Menace, it reveals that as she ended her reign as queen and became a senator, Padmé helped liberate a number of slaves on Tatooine, but was unsuccessful in freeing Shmi.
Padmé meets Clovis in a Senate orientation group, Captain Typho takes over for his uncle Captain Panaka as Padmé's bodyguard, and Amidala's relationship with Bail Organa and Palpatine is explored.
In an epilogue set after Revenge of the Sith, Sabé determines to investigate Padmé's death.
A prequel to the novel, titled Queen's Peril, was scheduled to be released on May 5, 2020, but was later delayed to June 2.
It is set soon before and during The Phantom Menace.
Padmé also appears in flashbacks in the novel Thrawn: Alliances.
In the limited Marvel comic series Princess Leia, Leia briefly sees a vision of Queen Amidala while visiting Naboo.

===
Video games ===
Padmé also appeared in console games based on the Star Wars franchise and made prominent appearances in the ones based on the Clone Wars timeline and often appearing as a playable character.

===
Legends ===
In April 2014, most of the licensed Star Wars novels and comics produced since the originating 1977 film Star Wars were rebranded by Lucasfilm as Star Wars Legends and declared non-canon.
====
Clone Wars (2003) ====
Padmé Amidala appears in eight chapters of the Star Wars:
Clone Wars micro-series that aired on Cartoon Network from 2003 to 2005.
She is secluded on Coruscant and maintains a correspondence with Anakin while he is fighting in the Clone Wars.
In one chapter, Padmé travels with Yoda (voiced by Tom Kane) aboard her ship when he senses a disturbance in the Force coming from the ice planet Ilum.
Despite Captain Typho's (voiced by James C. Mathis)
protest, she accompanies Yoda and helps rescue Jedi Master Luminara Unduli (voiced by Cree Summer) and
Padawan Barriss Offee (voiced by Tatyana Yassukovich).
In another chapter, she is thrilled by Anakin's graduation to Jedi Knight, and stores his Padawan braid with the necklace he gave her in The Phantom Menace.
In the final chapter, Padmé is briefly seen during General Grievous' assault on Coruscant.

====
Novels and comics ====
Padmé's background prior to her appearance in the prequel films is revealed in Star Wars novels and comics.
In Terry Moore's comic "A Summer's Dream" printed in Star Wars Tales 5 (2000) and set a year before the events of The Phantom Menace, Padmé is the Princess of Theed, Naboo's capital city.
A young man, Ian Lago, falls in love with Padmé, but she places her duty to the people over her personal happiness and rejects him.
Lago is the son of an advisor to King Veruna, the reigning monarch of Naboo.
In the novel, Cloak of Deception (2001) by James Luceno, King Veruna is forced to abdicate the throne following accusations of corruption.
Padmé is elected Queen of Naboo and contacts Palpatine to inform him that Veruna has been mysteriously killed.
She and Palpatine discuss the events that lead to the Trade Federation blockade of Naboo.
She admits to him, "Naboo can scarcely afford to become embroiled in a dispute that pits the Republic against the Trade Federation.
"Star
Wars literature focuses on Padmé's career as ruling monarch of Naboo.
The young-adult novel
Star Wars Episode
I Journal: Amidala (1999) by Jude Watson
focuses on Padmé Amidala's early career and narrow escape from the Trade Federation.
The Queen's Amulet (1999) by Julianne Balmain narrates the close friendship between Padmé and her handmaiden Sabé immediately before the events of The Phantom Menace.
Erik Tiemens's short comic "The Artist of Naboo" follows a young, unnamed artist on Naboo who becomes captivated by Padmé's beauty, features her in a series of paintings and later risks his life to save her.
Padmé's role in the Delegation of 2000—the senatorial resistance movement to Palpatine's growing absolutism—is discussed in James Luceno's Labyrinth of Evil (2005).
The Delegation of 2000 is primarily concerned with Palpatine's calls for public surveillance and restrictions on freedom of movement and action.
Still, Padmé is confident Palpatine will relinquish his power when the crisis is over: "He's not stubborn," she tells Bail Organa.
"
You just don't know him as I do.
He'll take our concerns to heart.
"Padmé appears in novels and comics set after the events of the original trilogy as holograms and flashbacks.
In Troy Denning's The Joiner King (2005), the first book in the Dark Nest trilogy, set 35 years after the events of A New Hope, Luke Skywalker discovers a hologram recorded by R2-D2 of Anakin Skywalker informing Padmé of his vision of her death in childbirth.
This is the first time Luke sees his mother.
Another hologram discovered in R2-D2 chronicles a conversation between Padmé and Obi-Wan.
In this hologram, Luke and Leia hear their mother's name for the first time.
In the final novel of the trilogy, The Swarm War, Luke and Leia see their mother's death and their own births.

== Reception ==
Reactions by critics to Portman's performances were mixed.
James Berardinelli called her acting in The Phantom Menace "lackluster," while Annlee Ellingson of Box Office Magazine said "Portman's delivery is stiff and flat, perhaps hindered by the gorgeous but cumbersome costumes.
"
In his review of Attack of the Clones, Mike Clark of USA Today complained about Portman and Hayden Christensen, who portrayed Anakin; he wrote, "Both speak in monotone for doubly deadly effect, though
when not burdened by his co-star, Christensen often finds the emotion in his limited intonations.
"
Ed Halter of The Village Voice, reviewing Revenge of the Sith, said that "computer-generated characters like wheezing cyborg baddie General Grievous and blippeting fireplug R2-D2" "emot[ed] more convincingly than either Natalie Portman or Hayden Christensen."
Nonetheless, Mick LaSalle of the San Francisco Chronicle described Portman's performance in Revenge of the Sith as "decorative and sympathetic".
Critics have blamed Portman's performance on Lucas' direction and script.
Roger Ebert, for example, charged that in Attack of the Clones "too much of ... the film is given over to a romance between Padmé and Anakin in which they're incapable of uttering anything other than the most basic and weary romantic clichés, while regarding each other as if love was something to be endured rather than cherished."
He offered a similar critique for Revenge of the Sith: "To say that George Lucas cannot write a love scene is an understatement; greeting cards have expressed more passion."

Todd McCarthy of Variety likewise lamented that "Lucas's shortcomings as a writer and director of intimate, one-on-one scenes" hampered Portman's performance.
In 2017, Rolling Stone magazine placed Padmé Amidala at the number 45 spot on their 50 Best Star Wars Characters of All Time list.
Pop culture website IGN named her the 25th greatest Star Wars character in their Top 100 countdown.
In 2019, Esquire magazine ranked her 28th on their 40 Greatest Star Wars Characters list.
In Ranker.com's list of the "hottest Star Wars characters", she ranked number one.
MovieHotties said: "Carrie was a looker in her day, but Portman is untouchable by either one of them."

Portman's performances as Padme Amidala in the prequel trilogy were nominated for three Saturn Awards.

==
Family tree ==


==
See also ==
Women warriors in literature and culture


==
References ==


==
Further reading ==


==
External links ==
Padmé Amidala in the StarWars.com Databank
Padmé Amidala on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars Wiki
Dressing A Galaxy:
The Costumes of Star Wars, an exhibit at the Fashion Institute of Design & Merchandising.
Obi-Wan "Ben" Kenobi () is a character in the Star Wars franchise.
Within the original trilogy, Obi-Wan is a Jedi Master as a supporting character and is portrayed by English actor Alec Guinness.
In the later-released prequel trilogy, a younger version of the character serves as one of the two main protagonists, alongside Anakin Skywalker, and is portrayed by Scottish actor Ewan McGregor.
In the original trilogy, he is a mentor to Luke Skywalker, to whom he introduces the ways of the Jedi.
After sacrificing himself in a duel against Darth Vader, Obi-Wan guides Luke through the Force in his fight against the Galactic Empire.
In the prequel trilogy, set decades earlier, he is initially a Padawan (apprentice) to
Jedi Master Qui-Gon Jinn and later the mentor and friend to Luke's father Anakin, who falls to the dark side of the Force and becomes Vader.
The character briefly appears in the sequel trilogy as a disembodied voice, speaking to Rey.
He is frequently featured as a main character in various other Star Wars media.

Guinness' performance as Obi-Wan in the original Star Wars (1977) earned him a nomination for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor, the only acting nomination for a Star Wars film.
McGregor's performance as the character in the prequels received praise as well, considered to be among the highlights of the often criticized trilogy.
McGregor is set to return as Obi-Wan in a web series on Disney+ centered on the character that takes place ten years after Revenge of the Sith and prior to A New Hope, with Hayden Christensen returning as Anakin Skywalker/Darth Vader alongside McGregor.
Guinness won the Saturn Award for Best Supporting Actor for his performance in A New Hope, while McGregor was nominated for the same category 20 years later for his performance in The Phantom Menace.

== Creation and development ==
The character is loosely inspired by General Makabe Rokurōta, a character from Akira Kurosawa's film The Hidden Fortress, played by Toshiro Mifune (whom franchise creator George Lucas also considered casting as Obi-Wan).
In an early draft of the original Star Wars film, Obi-Wan's first meeting with Luke Skywalker is lifted directly from The Hobbit, acknowledging Gandalf as a source of inspiration.
Lucas originally planned for Obi-Wan to live through the original film, but found that the character had nothing to do during the culminating battle sequence.
Lucas later reflected that he felt that "It would be much more powerful, satisfying and interesting if Darth Vader were to kill him and he were to go on to a different form."
==
Appearances ==


===
Skywalker saga ===


====
Original trilogy (1977–1983) ====
Obi-Wan Kenobi is introduced in the original Star Wars film living as a 57-year old hermit by the name of Ben Kenobi on the planet Tatooine.
When Luke Skywalker (Mark Hamill) and C-3PO (Anthony Daniels) travel the desert in search of the lost R2-D2 (Kenny Baker), Obi-Wan rescues them from a band of Tusken Raiders by imitating the call of a Krayt dragon.
At Obi-Wan's home, the now-found R2-D2 plays a recording of Princess Leia (Carrie Fisher) saying that R2-D2 contains the plans for the Galactic Empire's superweapon: the Death Star.
Leia asks him to deliver R2-D2 and the plans safely to her home planet of Alderaan in order to help the Rebel Alliance.
Obi-Wan reveals to Luke his secret identity and explains that he is a Jedi, a member of an ancient group of Force-sensitive warriors.
He explains that the Jedi were hunted down and exterminated by the Empire with help from his former apprentice, Darth Vader (portrayed by David Prowse, voiced by James Earl Jones), the apparent killer of Luke's father.
He gives Luke his father's lightsaber and asks him to accompany him to Alderaan and take up Jedi training.
Luke, at first, declines; but after finding that his aunt Beru (Shelagh Fraser) and uncle Owen (Phil Brown) have been killed by Imperial stormtroopers, he realizes he must go with Obi-Wan to Alderaan and to train as a Jedi.

At the settlement of Mos Eisley, Obi-Wan uses the Force to trick Imperial troops into letting them through a military checkpoint.
They enter a local cantina and meet smuggler Han Solo (Harrison Ford) alongside the Wookiee Chewbacca (Peter Mayhew).
Obi-Wan and Luke make a deal to travel to Alderaan aboard their ship, the Millennium Falcon.
During the mission, Obi-Wan begins instructing Luke in lightsaber combat.
He suddenly becomes worried and tells Luke of "a great disturbance in the Force".
Emerging from hyperspace, the group discovers that Alderaan has been destroyed by the Empire.
The Falcon then encounters an Imperial TIE Fighter.
They chase the TIE fighter to the Death Star, and subsequently get caught in the space station's tractor beam.
On board the Death Star, Obi-Wan ventures through and disables the tractor beam.
Not before long, Darth Vader confronts him, and they engage in a lightsaber duel.
Obi-Wan uses the duel to distract Vader as Luke, Leia, Han and Chewbacca escape to the Falcon.
Obi-Wan allows Vader to strike him down and his body mysteriously vanishes the moment he dies.
At the climax of the film, during the Rebel attack on the Death Star, Obi-Wan speaks to Luke through the Force to help him destroy the Imperial station.

In The Empire Strikes Back, Obi-Wan Kenobi appears several times as a Force ghost through the Force.
On the ice planet Hoth, he appears to instruct Luke to go to the planet Dagobah to find the exiled Jedi Master Yoda (Frank Oz).
Despite Yoda's skepticism, Obi-Wan convinces his old master to continue Luke's training.
Obi-Wan appears later to beseech Luke not to leave Dagobah to try to rescue his friends on Cloud City, although Luke ignores this advice.
In Return of the Jedi, Obi-Wan again appears to Luke after Yoda's death on Dagobah.
Obi-Wan acknowledges that Darth Vader is indeed Luke's father, revealed by Vader himself in the previous film and confirmed by Yoda on his deathbed, and also reveals that Leia is Luke's twin sister.
He urges Luke to confront and defeat Vader; Luke once more rejects his advice.
After the Rebels destroy the second Death Star and defeat the Empire, Obi-Wan appears at the celebration on Endor, alongside the Force ghosts of Yoda and the redeemed Anakin Skywalker (Hayden Christensen).

====
Prequel trilogy (1999–2005) ====
In Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace, set 32 years before A New Hope, a 25-year-old Obi-Wan Kenobi appears as the Padawan apprentice of Jedi Master Qui-Gon Jinn (Liam Neeson).
He accompanies his master in negotiations with the corrupt Trade Federation, which is blockading the planet Naboo with a fleet of spaceships.
They fight a swarm of battle droids and stow away on a landing craft en route to Naboo.
Once on Naboo, Obi-Wan and Qui-Gon rescue Naboo's 14-year-old Queen Padmé Amidala (Natalie Portman), with help from native Gungan Jar Jar Binks (Ahmed Best), and escape in a spaceship toward the Republic capital of Coruscant.
Their ship is damaged in the escape, causing the hyperdrive generator to malfunction, and they land on Tatooine, where they discover the nine-year-old slave Anakin Skywalker (Jake Lloyd).
Qui-Gon believes the boy is the "Chosen One" prophesied to bring balance to the Force.
Anakin joins the group as they travel to Coruscant.
While leaving Tatooine, they are attacked by Darth Maul (portrayed by Ray Park, voiced by Peter Serafinowicz), a member of the Sith, a cult of the dark side long thought to be extinct.

When Qui-Gon and Obi-Wan return to Naboo to defeat the Trade Federation, they are met again by Maul, who engages them both in lightsaber combat.
When Maul mortally wounds Qui-Gon,
Obi-Wan storms in to duel Maul, who nearly kills him.
However, Obi-Wan manages to turn the tables and defeat Maul, cutting him in half.
He promises to fulfill Qui-Gon's dying wish to train Anakin as a Jedi, with or without the council's blessing.
Yoda proclaims Obi-Wan a Jedi Knight and reluctantly allows him to take Anakin on as his own Padawan.

In Attack of the Clones, set 10 years later, Obi-Wan is now a respected Jedi Knight and the master of Anakin Skywalker (Hayden Christensen).
Over the years, Anakin has grown powerful but arrogant, and believes that Obi-Wan is "holding him back".
After they save Padmé, now a senator, from an assassination attempt, Obi-Wan goes on a solo mission to trace the would-be assassins involved to the planet Kamino.
He learns of a massive clone army that the planet's inhabitants are building for the Republic.
The clones' template is bounty hunter Jango Fett (Temuera Morrison), and he and Obi-Wan battle once the latter deduces Fett must be behind the attempted assassination.
Fett escapes to the planet Geonosis with his clone son Boba (Daniel Logan), unaware that Obi-Wan has pursued them.

On Geonosis, Obi-Wan discovers that a conspiracy of star systems bent on revolution from the Republic is led by Jedi-turned-Sith Lord Count Dooku (Christopher Lee), Qui-Gon's old master.
After sending a message to Anakin, Obi-Wan is captured, interrogated, and sentenced to death by Dooku.
Anakin and Padmé arrive with a cadre of Jedi and the clone army, just in time to prevent the executions.
Obi-Wan and Anakin confront Dooku, but the Sith Lord overpowers them both.
Yoda intervenes and saves their lives, at the cost of Dooku's escape.
In Revenge of the Sith, set three years later, Obi-Wan is now a Jedi Master and a member of the Jedi Council, as well as a General in the Grand Army of the Republic.
Anakin, by now a Jedi Knight, remains Obi-Wan's partner, and the two have become war heroes and best friends.
The film opens with the two on a rescue mission to save the kidnapped Supreme Chancellor Palpatine (Ian McDiarmid) from cyborg Separatist commander General Grievous (Matthew Wood) on board his cruiser.
Dooku duels the Jedi once again, knocking Obi-Wan unconscious; while Obi-Wan is out cold, Anakin defeats Dooku and executes him on Palpatine's orders.
Soon after returning to Coruscant, Obi-Wan travels to planet Utapau to track down Grievous.

After finding the Separatist encampment, Obi-Wan fights Grievous and kills him with an abandoned blaster.
When Palpatine—who is secretly the Sith Lord Darth Sidious, the mastermind of the war—issues Order 66 to have the clone troopers turn on the Jedi, Obi-Wan survives the attempt on his life and escapes, rendezvousing with Yoda and Senator Bail Organa (Jimmy Smits) of Alderaan aboard Organa's ship, Tantive IV.
Returning to Coruscant, he and Yoda discover that every Jedi in the Jedi Temple has been murdered.
After sending a beacon to all surviving Jedi to scatter across the galaxy and remain in hiding, a distraught Obi-Wan watches security footage revealing that it was Anakin—who is now Sidious' Sith apprentice, Darth Vader—who led the chaos.
Yoda says that he will confront Sidious, and he charges Obi-Wan with battling Vader.
Obi-Wan is loath to fight his best friend, but reluctantly accepts when Yoda says that Anakin Skywalker no longer exists, having been “consumed” by Vader.

Obi-Wan visits Padmé to question of Vader's whereabouts, and realizes that Vader is her husband and the father of her unborn child.
When Padmé sets out to the volcanic planet Mustafar to confront her husband herself, Obi-Wan secretly stows away aboard her ship.
After they arrive on Mustafar, Obi-Wan reveals himself and confronts Vader, who accuses Padmé and Obi-Wan of conspiring against him and uses the dark side to choke Padmé into unconsciousness.
After a long and ferocious lightsaber duel, Obi-Wan defeats Vader by severing his legs and left arm.
Obi-Wan watches in horror as Vader slides too close to a lava flow and catches fire; he then takes his former friend's lightsaber and leaves him to die.
Unbeknownst to Obi-Wan, Vader is rescued by Sidious moments later and reconstructed into the cyborg as first seen in the original trilogy.

Obi-Wan takes Padmé to the asteroid Polis Massa, where she dies after giving birth to twins Luke and Leia.
Afterwards, Yoda instructs Obi-Wan to deliver Luke to Anakin's stepbrother Owen Lars (Joel Edgerton) and his wife Beru (Bonnie Piesse) on Tatooine, and reveals that Qui-Gon's force ghost has returned to teach him to become one with the Force after death.
On Tatooine, Obi-Wan hands Luke off to his step-family and goes into exile to wait until the time is right to challenge Sidious and the newly created Galactic Empire.

====
Sequel trilogy (2015–2019) ====
In The Force Awakens, set 30 years after Return of the Jedi,
the protagonist Rey (Daisy Ridley) hears Obi-Wan's voice when she touches the lightsaber that previously belonged to Luke.
Obi-Wan says Rey's name, before echoing the words of encouragement he gave to Luke during his training on the Millennium Falcon: "These are your first steps."
James Arnold Taylor first recorded the lines for this scene, but his recordings were replaced with Ewan McGregor's voice acting.
Obi-Wan's line "Rey" is an edited voice recording of Alec Guinness saying "
afraid".
In The Last Jedi, Luke indirectly mentions Obi-Wan while talking with Rey about the fall of the Jedi.
According to the film's writer and director, Rian Johnson,

I would have loved to have had Ewan McGregor in the movie
but it was just a matter of storytelling.
The original relationship with Obi Wan — obviously if Alec Guinness were still with us that would have made sense.
But we never saw Luke ever interact with the Ewan version of Obi Wan, so there's less of the emotional connection
and it might have been a little odd. ...
so it made sense that Yoda be the one that comes back and kicks
[Luke's] butt a little.

In The Rise of Skywalker, Rey hears Obi-Wan's voice along with other Jedi from the past as she battles a resurrected Palpatine.
Obi-Wan says to her, "These are your final steps, Rey.
Rise and take them...
Rey... Rise."
Both the voices of McGregor and Guinness are used, again with recording of Guinness saying "afraid" being repurposed to say "Rey".
===
Anthology films ===
Obi-Wan is referenced indirectly in the 2016 film Rogue One.
Rebel Alliance leader Mon Mothma (Genevieve O'Reilly) has a conversation with Senator Bail Organa in which they discuss delivering the plans for the Death Star to a Jedi Knight who went into hiding after the fall of the Republic; it is implied that they are talking about Obi-Wan.

===
Television ===
Obi-Wan Kenobi is a main character in the animated micro-series Star Wars:
Clone Wars and the CGI animated series
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars, voiced by James Arnold Taylor.
In both series, Obi-Wan is a general in the Clone Wars, and he and Anakin (voiced by Matt Lanter)
have many adventures fighting the Separatists.
The latter series highlights his numerous confrontations with General Grievous, his adversarial relationship with Dark Jedi Asajj Ventress (voiced by Nika Futterman), his romance with Duchess Satine Kryze (voiced by Anna Graves), and the return of his old enemy Darth Maul.

In Star Wars Rebels, set five years before A New Hope, Obi-Wan appears as a hologram in the pilot episode, "Spark of Rebellion".
In the Season 3 episode "Visions and Voices", protagonist Ezra Bridger (voiced by Taylor Gray) discovers that Obi-Wan is alive on Tatooine; Obi-Wan's old nemesis Darth Maul finds him as well.
In the episode "Twin Suns", Obi-Wan finds Ezra while he is lost in the desert while letting him know
Maul was intending to use him.
At that moment, Maul attacks them, and Obi-Wan ushers Ezra to retreat.
Obi-Wan mortally wounds Maul during a final lightsaber duel; with his dying breath, Maul asks Obi-Wan if he is protecting the "Chosen One", and Obi-Wan replies that he is.
After Maul's death, Obi-Wan is seen watching over Luke Skywalker from a distance.
In Rebels, Obi-Wan was voiced by Stephen Stanton, who replaced James Arnold Taylor.
Rebels creator Dave Filoni, who worked with the character during the full duration of Star Wars: The Clone Wars, said he considered asking McGregor to reprise and voice the role.
However, a voice recording of the late Alec Guinness as Obi-Wan Kenobi was used in a 2018 episode.

====
Upcoming series ====
Ewan McGregor is set to reprise his role as the Jedi master in Obi-Wan Kenobi, a live-action series for Disney+ set between the end of the prequel and the start of the original trilogy.
A film centered on the character was previously in pre-production before being cancelled in favor of the series.

Plans for a standalone Star Wars movie about Obi-Wan were rumored (but not officially announced) in August 2017; the film was to be directed and co-written by Stephen Daldry.
McGregor stated publicly that he would be open to reprising the role of Obi-Wan, though as of mid-2018 said he knew of no plans to do so.
In December 2017, it was reported that an Obi-Wan anthology film was eying a potential January 2019 production start date.
On May 17, 2018, it was reported that the next Star Wars anthology film would be Kenobi: A Star Wars Story, produced under the working title Joshua Tree, with Daldry directing.
According to TMZ, the movie would take place a few years after Revenge of the Sith, featuring marauding Tusken Raiders and an evil warlord, who bring Obi-Wan out of hiding to protect Luke.
Then-UK Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson was quoted as saying the filmmakers of an Obi-Wan film had proposed shooting it in Northern Ireland.
While the project was voted as the most wanted anthology film in a poll by The Hollywood Reporter, it was instead developed as a limited streaming series following the box office disappointment of Solo: A Star Wars Story.
On August 15, 2019, the series was reported to be in development for Disney's streaming service, Disney+.
This was officially confirmed on August 23 at the D23 Expo.
McGregor expressed his relief at the project's announcement "because for four years, I've been having to lie to people about it", and stated that the series would consist of six one-hour episodes.
According to Lucasfilm president Kathleen Kennedy, the show's scripts had been completed, but these were later confirmed to be rewritten to some degree.
Deborah Chow will direct the series and executive produce alongside Hossein Amini, who wrote the series.
Other executive producers include McGregor, Kennedy, and Tracey Seaward.
According to Amini, the series was set to begin filming in July 2020, but after stepping down as writer by January of that year, production was pushed back to early 2021.
In February 2020, it was reported that the working title had been changed to Pilgrim, and in April, it was announced that Joby Harold would take over writing duties.
The series does not have an announced release date.
In October 2020, McGregor stated that it was set to begin filming in March 2021.
During Disney Investor Day 2020, it was announced that Hayden Christensen would return as Darth Vader in the series and that it would be set ten years after the events of Revenge of the Sith.
It was also first officially titled Obi-Wan Kenobi.
On February 2, 2021, McGregor shared some updates about the series.
He stated that the series would be making use of The Mandalorian's stagecraft technology.
McGregor also stated that they were going to "start making it in the late spring" in Los Angeles.
On March 1, it was reported that Indira Varma had joined the series' cast.

===
Novels and comics ===
Obi-Wan Kenobi appears briefly in the novel Dark Disciple (2015), based on unfinished episodes from The Clone Wars.
It fleshes out the friendship between him and Rogue Jedi Quinlan Vos.
In the novelization of The Last Jedi (2017) written by Jason Fry, Luke, passing away, hears Obi-Wan's voice telling him to "let go".
The five-issue Marvel Comics mini-series Obi-Wan and Anakin focuses on the title characters between The Phantom Menace and Attack of the Clones.
In the 2015 Star Wars comic series, Luke Skywalker goes to Obi-Wan's abandoned house on Tatooine and finds his diary, from which stories of Obi-Wan's past are recounted.
Obi-Wan also appears as a main character in the novel Master and Apprentice (2019) by Claudia Gray, set before the events of The Phantom Menace.
The book details his relationship with his Jedi Master, Qui-Gon Jinn.

===
Legends ===
Obi-Wan appears extensively in the Star Wars Expanded Universe of comic books and novels.
In April 2014, all prior works except the episodic films and The Clone Wars animated series were rebranded by Lucasfilm as Legends and declared non-canon to the franchise.

====
Novels ====
Obi-Wan's life prior to The Phantom Menace is portrayed mostly in Jude Watson's Jedi Apprentice series, which follows his adventures as Qui-Gon's Padawan.
Notable events in the series include battling the Dark Jedi Xanatos and going on his first independent mission.
Watson's Jedi Quest series detail his adventures with Anakin in the years leading up to Attack of the Clones.

Obi-Wan's heroism just before and during the Clone Wars is portrayed in novels such as Outbound Flight, The Approaching Storm, and The Cestus Deception.

Obi-Wan's life between Revenge of the Sith and A New Hope is portrayed mostly in Jude Watson's The Last of the Jedi series.
Set roughly a year after the fall of the Republic, the series follows Obi-Wan as he seeks out possible survivors of the Great Jedi Purge, most notably Anakin's former rival, Ferus Olin.
The books also portray Obi-Wan adjusting to life as a hermit on Tatooine and quietly watching over Luke.
He discovers that Vader is still alive after seeing him on the Holonet, the galaxy's official news source.

Obi-Wan appears in the final chapter of Dark Lord:
The Rise of Darth Vader, set just after the events in Revenge of the Sith, in which he learns that Vader survived their duel on Mustafar.

Obi-Wan appears as a Force ghost in many novels set after Return of the Jedi.
In The Truce at Bakura, he appears to Luke to warn him about the threat presented by the Ssi-ruuk; in The Lost City of the Jedi, he guides Luke to the titular city on Yavin IV; in Heir to the Empire, meanwhile, he bids farewell to Luke, explaining that he must abandon his spiritual form to "move on" to a new, higher plane of consciousness.
Before parting, Luke says that Obi-Wan was like a father to him, and Obi-Wan replies that he loved Luke like a son.

Kenobi is a Star Wars Legends novel that tells the story of Obi-Wan Kenobi's first days of self-exile on the desert planet Tatooine following the events of Star Wars:
Episode III Revenge of the Sith.
It was written by John Jackson Miller and first published by Del Rey in hardcover on August 27, 2013.
The first paperback edition was released on July 29, 2014, and includes the short tie-in story "Incognito" by Miller.

====
Video games ====
Obi-Wan Kenobi appears in several video games, including:


====
Comic books ====
Issue
#24 of Marvel's 1977 Star Wars comic depicts Obi-Wan during the time of the Republic.

Various Dark Horse Comics works utilize Kenobi, including several set during the Clone Wars.
In Star Wars: Republic (1998–2006)
, Obi-Wan fights the Separatists during the Clone Wars.
Among other notable storylines, he is kidnapped and tortured by Asajj Ventress before being rescued by Anakin ("Hate & Fear"), and apprehends corrupted Jedi Master Quinlan Vos ("The Dreadnaughts of Rendili").
Throughout the series, he grows increasingly wary of Palpatine's designs on the Republic and his influence on Anakin.

In the non-canon story "Old Wounds", published in Star Wars: Visionaries (2005) and set a few years after the events of Revenge of the Sith, Obi-Wan confronts Darth Maul on Tatooine to protect Luke.
The duel ends when Owen Lars shoots and kills Maul; he then warns Obi-Wan to stay away from his nephew.
Through the Force, Obi-Wan reassures Luke that he will be there for him when needed.

==
Cultural impact ==
Mad magazine parodied the original film under the title Star Roars and included a character named 'Oldie Von Moldie', a grizzled 97-year-old whose lightsaber runs on an extension cord.
The Shanghai nightclub shown in the beginning of Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom is called "Club Obi Wan"
(Lucas wrote both the Star Wars and Indiana Jones series).
A real bar/club by this name existed in the Xihai district of Beijing, China but closed in the summer of 2010.
The Super Mario Bros. Super Show!
episode "Star Koopa" (a spoof of Star Wars) also had its own parody of Obi-Wan called 'Obi-Wan Toadi', and the live-action segment "Zenned Out Mario" featured a parody called "Obi-Wan Cannoli".
The 1998 Animaniacs episode "Star Warners" (which spoofed Star Wars) featured Slappy Squirrel portraying a parody of Obi-Wan as 'Slappy Wanna Nappy'.
In the Family Guy episode "Blue Harvest", Obi-Wan Kenobi is parodied by the character Herbert.
In the short film Thumb Wars, Obi-Wan is parodied as the character "Oobedoob Benubi".
In the film, his full name is 'Oobedoob Scooby-Doobi Benubi, the silliest name in the galaxy.'
In the 1977 Star Wars parody Hardware Wars, Obi-Wan is parodied by the character "Augie Ben Doggie".

The TV Tropes website used to use Obi-Wan's name for the archetype mentor figure, and still uses Obi-Wan's name to describe moments where a character faces their imminent death calmly and gracefully, often having intended to die as part of a greater plan.

Guinness received an Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor nomination for his portrayal of Obi-Wan Kenobi.

In the parody song "The Saga Begins", released approximately one month after the release of Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace, "Weird Al" Yankovic sings a humorous summary of the plot of that film from Obi-Wan's perspective, to the tune of the song "American Pie".

In 2003, the American Film Institute selected Obi-Wan Kenobi as the 37th greatest movie hero of all time.
He was also listed as IGN's third greatest Star Wars character, as well as one of UGO Networks's favorite heroes of all time.
In 2004, the Council of the Commune Lubicz in Poland passed a resolution giving the name "Obi-Wan Kenobi" to one of the streets in Grabowiec, a small village near Toruń.
The street was named in 2005.
The spelling of the street name, Obi-Wana Kenobiego is the genitive form of the noun in the Polish language:
(the street) of Obi-Wan Kenobi.
The Guardian cartoonist Steve Bell portrayed Jeremy Corbyn, former leader of the British Labour Party, as Obi-Wan Kenobi.
Portraits of Ewan McGregor as Kenobi have been confused for being those of Jesus, especially by Mormons.
Many fans have called for an official Obi Wan Kenobi day, though no action has been made by the Star Wars franchise or the Google Calendar Program.
Suggested dates include: the fifth of February (5.2) and the sixteenth of June (16.6)


==
Relationships ==


===
Mentorship tree ===


==
References ==
Footnotes
Citations


===
Sources ===


==
External links ==
Obi-Wan Kenobi in the StarWars.com Databank
Obi-Wan Kenobi on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Obi-Wan Kenobi on IMDb
Tatooine () is a fictional desert planet that appears in the Star Wars  space-opera franchise.
It is a beige-colored, desolate world orbiting a pair of binary stars, and inhabited by human settlers and a variety of other life forms.
The planet was first seen in the original 1977 film Star Wars, and has to date featured in a total of six Star Wars theatrical films.

It is the home planet of the protagonist of the Star Wars Trilogy, Luke Skywalker, and also of his father, Anakin Skywalker.
Shots of the binary sunset over the Tatooine desert are considered to be an iconic image of the film series.

==
Development ==
In his early drafts of the Star Wars story, author George Lucas changed the names of planets and characters several times.
In his early treatment, Lucas opened the story on the fourth moon of the planet Utapau, the home of a young warrior called Annikin Starkiller.
In Lucas's rough draft, The Star Wars (1974), the escaping droids land in a desert on the planet Aquilae; in later drafts the planet again takes the name of Utapau.
Prior to production, early artwork commissioned by Lucas from conceptual illustrator Ralph McQuarrie show robots lost on a desert world, scorched by twin suns and mysterious, masked Tusken Raiders riding large horned Banthas.

George Lucas originally envisaged filming the Utapau/Tatooine scenes in Algeria (inspired by Michelangelo Antonioni's 1975 film The Passenger), Libya or Iran, but these locations were rejected by 20th Century Fox.
When production began on Star Wars, production designers John Barry and Robert Watts scouted for filming locations in Morocco and Tunisia.
Lucas, accompanied by producer Gary Kurtz visited the Tunisian island of Djerba with them and were impressed by the desert landscape and the unusual architecture, and selected Tunisia to provide the desert planet setting.
Lucas was also keen to shoot at the Hotel Sidi Driss in Matmata, a decision which extended the shoot by a day and consequently the budget.
Filming in Tunisia began on March 22, 1976, and immediately ran into difficulty: the region was experiencing its first heavy rainfall in seven years, which disrupted the setting of an arid desert planet.
The Matmata hotel consisted of a troglodyte dwelling in a large hole in the ground.
Combined with shots at Chott el Djerid, near Nefta, this formed the setting for the Lars homestead and moisture farm.
The landing site for C-3PO and R2-D2's escape pod was filmed in sand dunes at La Grande Dune, near Nefta, and exterior shots of Mos Eisley spaceport were shot on Djerba.
The name Tatooine is not actually mentioned in the final screenplay of Star Wars
—Lucas was still working on his fourth draft while scouting locations, and adapted the name from a town in southern Tunisia called Tataouine
(French spelling, or Tataween spelling in Tunisian Arabic).Certain scenes filmed on Djerba were subsequently deleted from the final cut of the film in order to improve the narrative pace.
The most significant material cut was a series of scenes set in the township of Anchorhead which served to introduce the characters of Luke Skywalker and Biggs Darklighter.
Lucas asked film editor Richard Chew to cut these scenes as they had been likened to "American Graffiti in outer space" by Fox executives (in reference to Lucas's 1973 film).

Footage filmed at Sidi Bouhlel in Tunisia was combined with 1977 second unit filming at Death Valley National Park in California was used to create the rocky canyon scenes featuring Jawas and Tusken Raiders.

When crews returned to Tunisia to film for the Star Wars prequel films in 1998, locations at Onk Jemal (Ong Jmal) in Tozeur, Ksar Ouled Soltane and Ksar Hadada
, Ghoumrassen were used for Tatooine scenes.
Abandoned sets for the filming have been left in the desert but can be visited.

==
Film appearances ==
Tatooine originally featured in the 1977 film Star Wars, and was the first planet to be seen in the film franchise.
In the opening scene, the planet and two of its moons are seen in space against a sea of stars, forming the backdrop of a space battle which sets in motion the events of the film.
Two robots, C-3PO and R2-D2, jettison in an escape pod from a captured spaceship, the Tantive IV, and crash land on the surface of Tatooine.
The droids lose their way in a sparse desert and are captured by small scavenger creatures called Jawas.
When the robots are sold on to human settlers, protagonist Luke Skywalker is introduced as a young man living with his aunt and uncle on a farm.
The hostility of the arid desert environment is emphasised by the depiction of sandstorms and the heat of the binary stars, as Luke watches a twin sunset over the sand dunes.
Humans are constantly threatened by violent bandit creatures called Tusken Raiders.
As the film progresses, various leading characters are introduced to the story in scenes set on Tatooine:
Obi-Wan Kenobi, Han Solo and Chewbacca.
Later Tatooine scenes take place in Mos Eisley, a gritty bustling spaceport on the planet which is a centre of smuggling and organised crime.
One of the most celebrated scenes in the Star Wars saga is in the Mos Eisley cantina, a shady saloon populated by exotic alien species.
Composer John Williams wrote music for the alien band in this scene in the style of swing musician Benny Goodman, and arranged with unusual instrumentation to convey an other-worldly sound.
Tatooine features once again in the 1983 film Return of the Jedi, in which the story's heroes return to Tatooine to rescue Han Solo from Jabba the Hutt, a fearsome gangster who dominates the criminal underworld on Tatooine.

When the prequel trilogy revived the film franchise in 1999, the action returned to Tatooine for Episode I: The Phantom Menace as the setting for the childhood of Luke's father, Anakin Skywalker.
Living as a slave in another spaceport, Mos Espa, Anakin competes in pod races, long-distance airborne races across the desert.
The Jedi master Qui-Gon Jinn meets Anakin after making an emergency landing on the planet, and helps him win his freedom.
In Episode II: Attack of the Clones (2002), an older Anakin returns to Tatooine to search for his mother, Shmi, who has been kidnapped by Tusken Raiders.
The prequels depict a vast expanse of desert with jagged rock formations.
Tatooine features once more in the final prequel film, Episode III: Revenge of the Sith (2005); in the closing scene, Obi-Wan Kenobi takes the infant Luke Skywalker and delivers him to his adoptive parents on the Tatooine moisture farm while he goes into hiding by residing in the Junland Wastelands which are in Tatooine's mountainous areas, thus explaining his first appearance in that location in the Episode IV.Tatooine appears briefly at the end of The Rise of Skywalker, when Rey visits the remains of the Lars moisture farm.

== Description ==
Located in the galaxy's desolate Outer Rim, Tatooine orbits a pair of binary G-type stars, Tatoo I and Tatoo II.
The planet's indigenous lifeforms such as the womp rat, bantha, Sarlacc, and Krayt dragon are well-adapted to its arid climate.
Though its proximity to the suns makes life difficult, it is located near key hyperspace routes, making it a smuggler and gangster haven; debris from shipwrecks also provides resources for scavengers.
Annual sandstorms wipe out landmarks and make nomadic life dangerous, with the planet's populations clustered into distinct settlements.
A small Imperial presence brings the planet an additional source of water, its most precious commodity.
Though tasked to enforce the law, stormtroopers often overlook crime; an efficient black market also enables the procurement of illegal goods.
Human settlers often become moisture farmers and live in subterranean dwellings in order to survive.
Pipe systems distribute most of the harvested moisture to indoor crops supplying food for the farmers.
Rare water sources such as springs in badlands (e.g. Beggar's Canyon) provide hydration for hermits and Tusken Raiders.

The planet is dominated by the Hutts, a clan of gangsters and crime lords.
Since Tatooine was beyond the reach of the Galactic Republic, the Hutts presided over the lawless planet with little outside interference.

When the Galactic Empire subsumed the Old Republic, the new regime established only a token presence on Tatooine, which left Jabba the Hutt's reign unchallenged until his death during the events depicted in Return of the Jedi.
The planet gained notability in the galaxy as the homeworld of Luke Skywalker.

==
Inhabitants ==
Humans – Settlers
Hutts –
Wormlike crime lords
Jawas – Humanoid rodent scavengers and traders, and one of the native life forms of Tatooine
Tusken Raiders (or Sand People) –
Fierce, nomadic humanoids and one of the native life forms of Tatooine


=== Flora and fauna ===
== Locations ==
Because Tatooine features so prominently in the Star Wars film series, a wide range of locations has been represented on-screen.
===
Settlements ===
Although the planet is sparsely populated, settlements of varying size have provided the settings for many scenes in Star Wars films.

The first settlement to be shown, is Anchorhead, where many humans settlers on Tatooine pursue a difficult agrarian existence on remote "moisture farms" in the desert, collecting water vapor from the atmosphere to grow crops.
Among these moisture farmers is the young hero of the film, Luke Skywalker, who resides with his Uncle Owen and Aunt Beru at the Lars Homestead.
The region is dangerous, with kidnappings by Tusken Raiders being a major problem, as shown in Attack of the Clones (2002), when Luke's father Anakin, lost his mother to Tusken Raiders.
In the original film, Luke also mentions Tosche Station (or Toshi Station), which was a mechanical repair shop featured in scenes that were deleted from the final cut of the original 1977 film.
In the deleted scenes, Luke meets his young friends and bids farewell to Biggs Darklighter, who is about to leave to the Imperial Academy.
The Jedi Obi-Wan Kenobi is also exiled near that region, although his house is remote from other houses, as he is hiding under the alias Ben.
Bestine is the "capital" of Tatooine; although it does not appear in any films, it is mentioned as "Bestine township" in the 1976 novelisation Star Wars:
From the Adventures of Luke Skywalker and is featured prominently in Star Wars Galaxies video games.
In the Expanded Universe, there is also a separate planet named Bestine.
Mos Pelgo briefly known as Freetown, was a town located in the northern hemisphere of the planet Tatooine.
Seen in both Star Wars:
The Old Republic: Knights of the Eternal Throne and The Mandalorian.
===
Spaceports ===
Two major spaceport locations have been shown on Tatooine:

Mos Eisley (Star Wars, 1977) is the planet's biggest city: a bustling spaceport with an active criminal underworld, described by Obi-Wan Kenobi a "wretched hive of scum and villainy.
"
This is the location of one of the most noted scenes in Star Wars, Chalmun's Cantina, which is shown as a busy saloon bar-style establishment, patronised by exotic and often violent alien species.
The Cantina additionally features as a location in Lego Star Wars video games and Fortnite.

Mos Espa (The Phantom Menace, 1999) is home to the Boonta Eve Classic podrace track.
Anakin Skywalker spent his childhood in the city, along his mother Shmi; both were slaves under the ownership of Watto.
Anakin became the first human to win the race and earned his freedom in the process, due to a bet between Watto and Jedi Qui-Gon Jinn.
The city's depiction in The Phantom Menace was intended to look larger than what was seen of Mos Eisley in the original Star Wars.

===
Desert locations ==
=
Tatooine is mostly a desert environment.
Characters in the films make reference to the deserts by name: the Jundland Wastes, a rocky region, is the location of the Tusken Raider attack in Star Wars (1977), and the neighboring Dune Sea (the basin of an ancient ocean) is the setting for Jabba the Hutt's palace.
Also situated in the Dune Sea is the Great Pit of Carkoon, the lair of the deadly omnivorous Sarlacc creature.

==
Appearances ==


===
Films ===
Star Wars (1977)
The Empire Strikes Back (1980)
(mentioned only)
Return of the Jedi (1983)
Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace (1999)
Star Wars:
Episode II – Attack of the Clones (2002)
Star Wars:
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith (2005)
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars (2008)
Star Wars:
The Force Awakens (2015) (mentioned only)
Solo:
A Star Wars Story (2018) (mentioned only)
Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker (2019)


===
Television ===
Star Wars Holiday Special (1978)
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars (2008)
Star Wars Rebels (2014–2018)
The Mandalorian (2019–)


====
Licensed parodies ====
Phineas and Ferb:
Star Wars (2014)


=== Video games and theme park attraction ===


==
Similarity to real planets ==
The discovery of exoplanets in the real universe gained pace in the early 21st century.
In 2015, the US space agency NASA published an article which stated that many of the newly discovered astronomical bodies possessed scientifically confirmed properties that are similar to planets in the fictional Star Wars universe.
Among them, the planets TOI 1338 b, Kepler-16b and Kepler-453b have been likened to Tatooine because they have been discovered orbiting binary star systems.

==
Influence ==
The desert planet of Jakku in the Star Wars sequel
trilogy film
The Force Awakens (2015) has been noted as being very similar to Tatooine.
In August 2019, rapper Kanye West announced that he was designing prefabricated homes inspired by the settlements on Tatooine seen in A New Hope to serve as low-income housing.
His prototypes in Calabasas, California were torn down after he was cited for not obtaining the proper permits and receiving complaints about the "gumdrop-shaped" structures.
On July 5, 2020, West tweeted a photograph of similar structures being built to promote his presidential campaign.

==
See also ==
List of Star Wars planets and moons
Desert planet


==
References ==


===
Sources ===


==
External links ==
Tatooine in the StarWars.com Databank
Tatooine on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
The Incom Corporation T-65B X-wing starfighter is a name applied to a fictional spacecraft family from the Star Wars franchise.

Named for the distinctive shape made when its s-foils (wings) are in attack position, the X-wing was a class of starfighter used by the Rebel Alliance in their conflict with the Galactic Empire.

It made its theatrical debut, as the T-65B model, in Star Wars (1977) as the spacecraft piloted by Luke Skywalker and the Red Squadron when Luke destroyed the Death Star.

The starfighter featured extensively in the Star Wars original trilogy and in the Expanded Universe that followed, and has been merchandised as a variety of toys and models.

Starting with The Force Awakens (2015) a new model of X-wing was introduced which has gone on to play a prominent role in the Star Wars sequel trilogy.

The T-70 X-wing, flown by the Resistance in their fight against the First Order, is depicted as the successor to the T-65.

Although described as being an improvement over the original, in the expanded literature
this new X-wing is itself considered outdated, having been replaced by the T-85 X-wing in the New Republic's fleet.

The T-85 X-wing made its first appearance in the TV series Star Wars Resistance (2018).

==
Origin and design ==
Industrial Light & Magic's (ILM)
Colin Cantwell sketched and built models that eventually became the final X-wing fighter in Star Wars.
The X-wings were designed to appear more "traditional" than the Empire's TIE fighters.
ILM built miniatures in various scales, with wing markings indicating which prop represented which pilot.
When ILM fell behind on generating X-wing footage, Star Wars producer George Lucas and his editors temporarily used World War II dogfight footage for initial editing cuts.
Each X-wing model was built around a hollow core made from surgical tubing, which allowed lighting, cooling, and electrical connectors for the wing motors to be installed and maintained.
The cockpit windows were made from faceted glass so that accurate reflections could be filmed.
Although the movie's initial script and novelization describe the X-wings as belonging to "Blue squadron", limitations in bluescreen photography led to the markings on the filming models, as well as the fictional squadron affiliation being changed to red.
In addition to miniatures, special effects genius John Stears and his crew made a single, full-size X-wing for scenes in the Rebels' Yavin 4 base hangar; combined with cardboard cutouts and careful editing, the Rebels appear to have dozens of fighters.
The production crew also made a full-size X-wing cockpit that was used for all actors; the astromech droid visible behind each actor was changed for each starfighter.
Background noise pitch and tone also varied between X-wings to further differentiate the characters piloting them.
The "lake" in which Luke Skywalker (Mark Hamill) crashes his X-wing in The Empire Strikes Back was only 3.5 feet (1.1 m) deep, requiring the creation of a rig resembling the starfighter sitting in the lake at an angle.
The rig was built in hinged sections so it could be manipulated by frogmen to sink or rise, a key feature for the scene when Luke fails to levitate his ship from the water.
In 1993, ILM visual effects specialist John Knoll created a proof of concept test of dogfighting X-wings and TIE fighters to demonstrate the feasibility of using commercially available desktop computer software for simple animation work.
This resulted in numerous parts of space battle scenes being "re-shot" as digital animations for the original trilogy's Special Edition releases.
The ARC-170 starfighter seen in Star Wars: Episode III – Revenge of the Sith is the ancestor of the X-wing and is deliberately reminiscent of the X-wing's design.

== Depiction ==
According to Star Wars canon, the T-65B X-wing was produced by the Incom Corporation, which had previously supplied the ARC-170 and Z-95 Headhunter starfighters to the Galactic Republic during the Clone Wars.

When the Galactic Empire ordered them to produce a new starfighter for the Imperial Navy, Incom engineers took inspiration from their previous work to create the X-wing.

Production was already underway however when politicking resulted in the Empire choosing instead to go with Sienar Fleet Systems' TIE fighter.

Faced with an overproduction of expensive starfighters, a new market was found when agents of the Rebel Alliance contacted Incom about acquiring their stock of X-wings, to which Incom eagerly agreed.

The X-wing quickly became a symbol of the Rebellion thanks to its use in several spectacular victories and the role it played in ultimately defeating the Empire.
Compared to the TIE fighter, the X-wing is said to be slower and less maneuverable in space, but boasts superior firepower, defenses, atmospheric maneuverability, and a supraluminal hyperdrive.

Its four laser canons can be fired singly, in pairs or all at once, and each launcher can carry up to three proton torpedoes.

In addition to deflector shields, the X-wing possesses a titanium alloy armored hull, electronic countermeasures, and armored cockpit.

An inertial dampener protects the pilot from high-g maneuvers, while an anti-gravity "repulsorlift" provides for flight in planetary atmospheres.
The T-65B X-wing's distinctive strike foils or "S-foils" are opened and closed by powerful servo motors in the spacecraft.

When in the open or 'attack' position, they provided a greater range of fire to the laser cannons mounted on the end of each wing.

They also serve to distribute energy to enlarge the deflector shield, shed waste heat, and function as stabilizer surfaces during air travel.
Instead of a dedicated navigational system, the X-wing makes use of an astromech droid (such as R2-D2) which fits in a socket behind the cockpit.

The droid can hold up to 10 hyperspace coordinates, make minor repairs to the craft, and assume full control of the X-wing if needed.

As with the pilot's ejection seat, an explosive charge can eject the droid from the X-wing in an emergency.

===
In Legends ===
According to roleplaying and other literature prior to Disney's acquisition of Lucasfilms, the origin of the X-wing is somewhat different compared to later material.

Incom Corporation had already begun designing the X-wing when the Empire's Imperial Security Bureau began to suspect the company of Rebel sympathies.

Before the empire could seize control of the company, the designers defected to the Rebel Alliance and handed over the X-wing's schematics.
The Rebel Alliance adopted the military strategy of Doctrine of Space Denial, wherein the Rebellion would raid Imperial boneyards and shipping frigates, both to disrupt Imperial logistics and operations, and also to requisition desperately needed materials.
X-wing hyperdrive capabilities allowed for this kind of harassment and escape before the Empire could react.
The presence of a hyperdrive and deflector shields differentiate the X-wing from the Empire's TIE fighters, emphasizing the importance the Rebels place on pilots surviving their missions.
Novels and roleplaying material set after Return of the Jedi showed the X-wing continued to be refined and upgraded in service to the New Republic;
the "XJ"-series X-wings, depicted in the war against the Yuuzhan Vong, have a third proton torpedo launcher, stronger lasers and improved engines.

==
Merchandise and licensing ==
Kenner Toys produced an X-wing toy as a complement to its action figure line in 1978; this model was made from formed plastic and had a battery-operated light and buzzer in the forward fuselage.
The "s-foils" were activated by depressing the molded astromech droid.
In 1982, a "battle-damaged" version was released using the same mold but with damage stickers, a grey fuselage, blackened engine inlets, and a darker canopy.
In countries outside the U.S., the electronics were removed and the R2-D2 “button” was chrome
(apart from the U.S., the electronic X-wing was only available in Brazil, Canada, and France).
Kenner also produced a die-cast 1:72 miniature X-wing in 1978 and a smaller scaled version with "battle damage crash feature" for the short lived Micro Collection line in 1982.

The X-wing appeared in four Micro Machines three-packs, including the first Star Wars pack released, a bronzed version, and a pack of three "battle damaged" X-wings with different colored markings.
The Micro Machines X-wing has also been released in two single-packs, as a promotional souvenir with German video releases, in a nine-pack of Original Trilogy vehicles, and once in clear plastic.
The X-wing appears eight times in the Micro Machines Action Fleet toy line:
Luke's starfighter on its own, with "targeter" stand, with Dagobah swamp damage, and in a double pack with a TIE Fighter, Wedge's starfighter on its own, and as a component of the Yavin Rebel Base playset, a toy based on the prototype packaged with Biggs Darklighter's starfighter, and Jek Porkins' starfighter.
Lego also released several X-wing models, including a 76-piece miniature X-wing/TIE advanced kit, a 263-piece X-wing (1999/2002), a 563-piece X-wing kit with Yoda's Hut (2004), a 437-piece X-Wing (2006), and a 560-piece X-wing (2012).
A 1,304-piece "Ultimate Collector's" model was released in 2000.
A new "Ultimate Collector's" model with 1,559 pieces was released in 2013.

X-wings also appear in numerous Star Wars games and Expanded Universe stories.
The player pilots an X-wing in the Atari Star Wars game.
It is also a playable ship in numerous LucasArts games, and is the eponymous vessel in the first of several space combat simulator games.
Both the Rebel Assault and Rebel Assault II rail shooters include X-wing levels, and X-wing squadrons are controllable units in the Rebellion and Empire at War strategy games.
Decipher and Wizards of the Coast published X-wing and X-wing-related cards for the Star Wars Customizable Card Game and Star Wars Trading Card Game, respectively.
Michael A. Stackpole and Aaron Allston wrote the X-wing novel series that focuses on the X-wing pilots of Rogue Squadron and Wraith Squadron, the former expanding the story of pilots like Wedge Antilles who appear in the films.
Dark Horse Comics has also published an X-Wing Rogue Squadron series.
In 2012, Fantasy Flight Games released the Star Wars: X-Wing Miniatures Game featuring several pilots and variations of the ship.
The X-wing also included in its Star Wars: Armada miniatures game and Star Wars: Rebellion board game.

==
Cultural influence ==
A model of Luke Skywalker's X-wing was among 250 Star Wars-related items on display at the National Air and Space Museum celebrating the franchise's twentieth anniversary.
An original X-wing filming prop sold at auction for $160,000 in July 2016.
In 2007, the San Diego Tripoli Rocket Association built and launched a 23-foot (7.0 m) X-wing model propelled by four rockets, which exploded seconds after launch.
A life-size X-wing is suspended from the ceiling at the Star Trader gift shop in Disneyland in California, as well as one displayed outdoors by the Star Tours attraction at Disneyland Paris.
A life-size X-wing made from Lego blocks appeared in Times Square, and a ¾-size replica is on display at the Wings Over the Rockies Air & Space Museum in Denver.
In 2018, a number of Star Wars starfighters had their aerodynamic abilities tested using the Autodesk Flow Design virtual wind tunnel program.

When tested, the classic T-65 X-wing design had a drag coefficient of .45, which is only slightly better than the coefficient of a sphere.

The newer T-70 X-wing flown by Poe Dameron (Oscar Isaac) was more aerodynamically sound with a rating of .24, but still fell short of the F-4E Phantom with its .02 drag coefficient.

These poor results were rationalized with the in-universe explanations that drag coefficient plays no role in space travel, and that Star Wars fighters can use repulsorlifts and deflector shields to give themselves better flight profiles.

== See also ==
List of Star Wars spacecraft


==
References ==


==
External links ==
X-wing starfighter in the StarWars.com Databank
Resistance X-wing in the StarWars.com Databank
X-wing on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Landspeeders are fictional anti-gravity craft used through the Star Wars movies and Star Wars expanded universe.
They are depicted both in civilian and military capacities, and several versions have been merchandised as toys and models.

==
Origin and design ==
Landspeeders first appear in Star Wars.
Two of them—Luke Skywalker's (Mark Hamill) X-34 and a V-35—were designed by noted special effects artist John Stears and were fitted around cars.

Skywalker's landspeeder was designed and built by Ogle Design around the chassis of a Bond Bug three-wheeler car.
One of the major challenges the production crew faced was disguising the wheels to create the illusion that the craft was hovering.
For certain shots, they shot from camera angles that masked the wheels; for long-distance shots, they used reflective material, gelatin on the camera lens, and shadow effects.
A small blur could be seen under the speeder, which George Lucas called "The Force Spot" (stated in Special Edition Tape).
Production designer Roger Christian used an angled mirror and a broom attached to the vehicle's underside to create, at certain angles, the illusion that the craft was hovering and kicking up dust.
Star Wars creator George Lucas used digital technology to enhance the landspeeder effects in the Special Edition of A New Hope.
Industrial Light and Magic's (ILM)
Doug Chiang designed the Naboo Flash speeder with a "race car look" while the Gian speeder's appearance is ILM's response to Lucas' request that the Naboo troops have "a pick-up truck with guns.
"The
landspeeder was put on display in the exhibit
Star Wars:
Where Science Meets Imagination that moved between various museums in 2008.

== Depiction ==
Within the Star Wars universe, speeder is a generic term for any "repulsorcraft" or vehicle which uses anti-gravity repulsorlift technology to hover and fly above a planet's surface.

Landspeeders more specifically use repulsor technology to hover just above the ground, while they cannot achieve any great height they are cheap and fast.

Many different types of landspeeders exist in the Star Wars universe to fulfill a variety of roles, including for personal transport.

In Star Wars Film and TelevisionX-34 Landspeeder: In A New Hope, Luke Skywalker (Mark Hamill) pilots an X-34 landspeeder, which he later sells before leaving Tatooine to join the Rebel Alliance.

Reference material identifies the X-34 as a civilian vehicle manufactured by SoroSuub Corporation.

At 3.4 m (11 ft) long, the X-34 can accommodate a pilot and passenger, while magnetic clamps behind the seating can accommodate droids or other cargo.

Other features include retractable windshield which can enclose the cockpit, terrain scanner and night-vision headlights.

With three turbine engines, it has a top speed of 250 km/h (160 mph) and maximum altitude of 1 m (3 ft 3 in).

Flash Speeder:
Flash speeders appear in The Phantom Menace as one of several patrol vehicles used by the Royal Naboo Security Forces.

Designed for street patrol and high-speed pursuit by the SoroSuub Corporation, the Flash speeder is 4.5 m (15 ft)
long with seating for a pilot and passenger and maximum altitude of 2 m (6 ft 7 in).

It is armed with a single pursuit/defense blaster on a 360° swivel mount.

Gian Speeder:
Gian speeders appear in The Phantom Menace as another landspeeder used by the Royal Naboo Security Force.

Unlike the Flash speeder though, reference material identifies the Gian speeder as a heavier vehicle only employed for tactical situations.

Also manufactured by the SoroSuub Corporation, the Gian has a top speed of 160 km/h (99 mph).
Its narrower body makes it harder to hit from the front or rear at the expense of maneuverability and its tougher hull is reinforced with armor to withstand glancing hits.

Larger than the Flash speeder with a length of 5.7 m (19 ft), the Gian speeder seats a pilot, gunner and two passengers.

Standard armaments include two side-mounted light repeating laser cannons, with the option of a hood-mounted heavy laser cannon.

Each weapon is independently powered in the event the speeder's main generator is damaged.

M-68 Landspeeder: The M-68 landspeeder first appears in Solo:
A Star Wars Story when Han Solo (Alden Ehrenreich) and Qi'ra (Emilia Clarke) hijack one to escape the White Worms gang.

Within the Star Wars universe, the M-68 is described as a popular street racing model manufactured by Mobquet Swoops and Speeders.

Nicknamed the "street blaster bolt", the M-68 has a top speed of 225 km/h (140 mph) and is available in both hardtop and open-air models.

A-A4B Truckspeeder:
When Han and Qi'ra attempt to flee the White Worms gang in Solo, they are pursued by Moloch in an A-A4B Truckspeeder.

Described as a heavy, rugged design, the A-A4B was built in-universe by Trast Heavy Transports with armored caging over the driver's seat and front grille, turning the landspeeder into a batter ram during high-speed chases.

==
Cultural impact ==
A Star Wars fan named Daniel Deutsch built a full-scale replica of the landspeeder that can be driven like an automobile.
It first surfaced at the Neatorama website where it was discovered by rapper Kanye West who posted pictures of the landspeeder in his blog.
One of the photographs show former 'N Sync member Joey Fatone posing next to the landspeeder.
Kanye West described the replica landspeeder as made of a "custom aluminum chassis, fiberglass body, and an electric drive system that hits lightspeed at 25 mph".
===
Toys ===
Radio Flyer created a toy version that a small child can drive around.
There is a cat bed made to look like a landspeeder.

==
Bibliography ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==
X-34 Landspeeder in the StarWars.com Databank
V-35 Landspeeder in the StarWars.com Databank
RGC Landspeeder in the StarWars.com Databank
Flash Speeder in the StarWars.com Databank
Gian Speeder in the StarWars.com Databank
Landspeeder on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
The sandcrawler is a fictional transport vehicle in the Star Wars universe that is found on the desert planet Tatooine.
The vehicle, as it appears in its major appearances in Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope, is 37 meters long and 18 meters tall.
Only a 27-meter length of its lower hull was constructed as a set for the film.
Other appearances were simulated with matte paintings and a remote-controlled model.

==
Origin and design ==
The design of the sandcrawler was first inspired by photographs of a NASA-designed rover created to explore alien planets.
It was conceived as large, old, very rusty, and having treads.
The front of the vehicle was envisioned to have a mouth-like scoop that lowered with hydraulics to pick up things, like a garbage truck.
While its original design was streamlined, it was modified to be taller and more awkward-looking.
The final design was created on April 5, 1975.

==
Production ==
The prefabricated movie set of the sandcrawler was shipped from England and took special effects genius John Stears and his crew
four days to move it thirty miles into the Tunisian desert.
It was two stories tall and ninety feet long when it was fully assembled, with the caterpillar tracks being almost twice as tall as a person, and covered in sand and mud to give them a "used" look.
The night before the scene with the Jawas was to be shot, a sandstorm blew apart the set, and it took a day to put it back together and an additional day to shoot the scene.
Afterwards, it was transformed into a burned-out hulk, taking another day.
The construction of the sandcrawler piqued the interest of the Libyan government, who sent inspectors across the border to make sure it was not an actual military vehicle of some kind.
==
Depiction ==
Most sandcrawlers are homes to Jawas.

They were originally constructed in Corellia for the purpose of serving as ore haulers during mining operations, and many were brought to Tatooine when it was first settled as a mining colony.

When the mining industry collapsed they were abandoned and the native Jawa took them over.
The number of sandcrawlers is unknown on Tatooine because most Jawa clans only meet during the annual "swap meets" when Jawa clans meet to trade with each other.
Jawa clans usually worship the Sandcrawler they have inhabited for generations.
The Sandcrawler is powered by eight massive turbines to power the treads which pull it over the dunes of the desert.
Since repairs are not done thoroughly, sandcrawlers are liable to fail at any time.
Within the Sandcrawler are a maze of tunnels, living quarters and rooms which keep spare parts, machinery and captured droids.
The front of the Sandcrawler opens to form a large ramp though there are also hatches between the giant treads that provide access to and from the crawler.
They are powerful enough to withstand Tusken Raiders but are no match for Imperial Stormtroopers.

The Sandcrawler first appeared in the 1977 film Star Wars Episode IV:
A New Hope, where R2-D2 and C-3PO were transported across the desert terrain of Tatooine.
They make a cameo appearance in Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace in the establishing shot for the podrace, and also appeared in the Star Wars Episode II: Attack of the Clones when Anakin Skywalker asks a Jawa leader for directions to a Tusken Raider camp.
One also appeared in the post credits of a documentary on The Phantom Menace DVD.
It was shown during the podrace, moving faster than and overtaking Sebulba's podracer.
A Sandcrawler and Jawas are also seen in the final sequence of Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker when Rey arrives on Tatooine.
Sandcrawlers, or early predecessors, have made appearances in many Star Wars video games, such as Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic (used by the Czerka Corporation), and Star Wars Jedi Knight:
Jedi Academy.

A digital pinball table based on Star Wars droids has a cabinet that moves and is shaped like a sandcrawler.
The vehicle appears in the Disney+ series The Mandalorian, in a scene where the titular character pursues a sandcrawler carrying the scavenged parts from his ship.

==
Cultural references ==
A 17-inch, radio-controlled toy Sandcrawler was released in 1979 as part of the original Kenner Star Wars toy line; a recolored version with a more "authentic" painted surface was issued in 2004.
In 2005, Lego came out with a detailed model.

Lucasfilm's Singapore base is shaped and named after the Sandcrawler.
==
References ==


==
External links ==
Sandcrawler in the StarWars.com Databank
Sandcrawler on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
The following is a list of fictional Star Wars terrestrial vehicles, including armoured fighting vehicles, military aircraft, and naval ships.

== Vehicles appearing in the Original Trilogy ==


===
All Terrain Armored Transport (AT-AT) ===
The All Terrain Armored Transport, or AT-AT walker, is a quadruped mechanized infantry combat vehicle used by the Imperial ground forces.
Standing over 20 metres (66 ft) tall with blast-impervious armour plating, these massive constructs are used as much for psychological effect as they are for tactical advantage.
The AT-AT (pronounced either casually as 'at at', or  using only the letters 'A.T. A.T.') was first introduced in The Empire Strikes Back (as the Galactic Empire's main units against Rebel Alliance infantry during the Battle of Hoth) and also appears in Return of the Jedi (as the vehicle used to transport Luke Skywalker and Darth Vader to their shuttle on the forest moon of Endor) and in Rogue One (in the AT-ACT variant, used to respond to the attacks of Rebel infantrymen of the Rogue One unit during the Battle of Scarif, although later defeated by the arriving Rebel Red Squadron of starfighers).
The AT-AT also appears in a destroyed form in Star Wars:
The Force Awakens, explained in the video game Star Wars Battlefront (2015) to be a residue of the Battle of Jakku, which was the Empire's last defeat and resulted in its dissolution.
Modified forms appear in The Last Jedi (used by the First Order to attack Resistance forces in a former Rebel base).

===
All Terrain Scout Transport (AT-ST) ===
The All Terrain Scout Transport (AT-ST) is a two-legged mech walker introduced briefly in The Empire Strikes Back and featured extensively in Return of the Jedi.
These vehicles were designed to screen and protect the flanks of slower moving AT-ATs and the larger tanks used by the Empire.

Due to their design and movement, they are often dubbed as a "chicken walker".

The name Scout Walker is also used to refer to an AT-ST.

This name was used for the official toy instead of the AT-ST name.

An AT-ST also appears briefly in Rogue One: A Star Wars Story, patrolling Jedha City following an attack by Saw Gerrera's forces.

A modified AT-ST later appears in The Mandalorian under the possession of a group of raiders, as the Empire has ceased to exist by the time of the series.

An updated model of the AT-ST is used by the First Order in The Last Jedi.
Shortly before the film's climax, an AT-ST is commandeered by BB-8.
===
Cloud car ===
Cloud cars fly around Bespin's Cloud City in The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi.
Compositing the cloud cars into the original releases required multiple motion control passes to prevent the vehicles from standing out too distinctly from their cloudy background.
Cloud cars were designed to have two cockpits that were interconnected with a small compartment block.
It was often a red-orange color with each cockpit arranged in a "shoe-shape" with the glass being on the "tongue" of the cockpit.
Like the rest of Cloud City, cloud cars were designed to reflect a more refined art deco style.

The scale models originally created for the movies were made of plastic parts using the then-new method of vacuum forming.

Cloud cars inserted into the films' Special Edition releases were computer-generated.
Within the Star Wars universe, these cloud cars (formally identified as Storm IV Twin-Pod models) were built by Bespin Motors specifically as atmospheric patrol craft.

The unusual vehicles consist of two separate pods connected together, one for a pilot and the other for a gunner.

It can achieve low orbit and attain speeds of 1,500 km/h (930 mph) thanks to a combination of repulsorlift drive and ion engine.

Each pod is armed with a light blaster cannon and protected with armor plating and an armored canopy.

While normally the port-side pod houses the pilot and starboard-side houses
the gunner, both pods contain all the equipment necessary to fulfill either role in the event one is damaged.

===
Desert Skiff ===
A pair of skiffs travel with Jabba's sail barge in Return of the Jedi.
The skiff was originally conceived as a flying animal carrying strapped-on passenger modules.
It was modified to be a nautical-type vehicle, and then transitioned to become more utilitarian.
A full-size skiff was built alongside the sail barge in Yuma.
An 81-centimeter miniature was also built, and it was "crewed" by poseable puppets.
Skiffs are a common mode of transport on many Star Wars worlds as per in-universe sources, utilizing repulsorlift technology to move cargo and passengers on the cheap.

The Bantha II-cargo skiffs seen in Return of the Jedi are also a favorite of various criminal organizations, which use them for raids and prisoner exchanges.

Built by Ubrikkian Industries, they are 9.5 m (31 ft) long, with an armored bow to withstand head-on collisions, and can reach speeds of 250 km/h (160 mph).

===
Jabba's Sail Barge (Khetanna) ===
A sail barge delivers Jabba the Hutt and his entourage to the sarlacc pit in Return of the Jedi.
Illustrator Ralph McQuarrie designed the ship to appear more utilitarian in comparison to early designs, which made the ship reminiscent of a Baroque sea craft.

Joe Johnston continued working on the design after McQuarrie stepped away from the project.
A 30,000-square-foot (2,800 m2) full-scale sail barge set was erected in Yuma, Arizona; it was one of the largest Star Wars sets created.

Measuring 150 feet long, 130 feet wide and 65 feet high, the sail barge set was supported by 130 wooden posts, each 27 feet high, which were deeply embedded into the ground.

Underneath the barge
were several offices and a commissary which could feed 150 people.

In order to get to the set, a two-mile road made of compacted sand was built, requiring roughly 80,000 gallons of water to construct.
According to Star Wars references, Jabba's sail barge is named the Khetanna and was built by Ubrikkian Industries as a pleasure barge for the crime lord.

At 30 m (98 ft) long, it is powered by a repulsorlift engine to reach a maximum speed of 100 km/h (62 mph) but can also use its two sails to slowly travel by air power.

While designed purely as a pleasure barge, the Khetanna is fitted with a laser cannon turret and heavy blasters can be mounted on the railings.

===
Landspeeder ===
Landspeeders are antigravity vehicles that appear throughout the films and Expanded Universe in both civilian and military roles.
They appear in Star Wars:
Episode IV – A New Hope.
===
Sandcrawler ===
C-3PO (Anthony Daniels) and R2-D2 (Kenny Baker) are briefly held in a Jawa sandcrawler in Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope.
Shots of the sandcrawler at a distance were actually a matte painting; only two of its treads and a 27-meter-long piece of its lower structure were actually built.
For shots involving the vehicle's movement, ILM used a 125-centimeter radio-controlled model.
A computer-generated sandcrawler briefly appears in The Phantom Menace, and a sandcrawler also appears in Attack of the Clones.
Sandcrawler-related merchandise include a Lego model, card game items, and Hasbro and Micro Machines toys.

===
Skyhopper ===
An Incom Corporation T-16 skyhopper appears in the background of the Lars residence in A New Hope, and Luke Skywalker (Mark Hamill) races a skyhopper in National Public Radio's radio adaptation of that movie; a skyhopper also appears at the end of the Special Edition release of Return of the Jedi.
The skyhopper model that Skywalker handles in A New Hope is the concept model Colin Cantwell built; budget limitations allowed only a partial full-size mock-up of the craft to be built.
In Star Wars: Rebel Assault, skyhoppers are used by Rebel pilots to train in Tatooine's Beggar's canyon.

===
Snowspeeder (T-47 Airspeeder) ===
A T-47 airspeeder, better known as "snowspeeder", is a Rebel Alliance vehicle featured in The Empire Strikes Back (1980) and
several books, comics, and video games in the Star Wars Expanded Universe and also in Atari game cartridges in the 80's.
Snowspeeder models and replicas have been merchandised by several companies.

Origin and designDuring production of The Empire Strikes Back, designer Joe Johnston conceived a ship that combined the body of an X-wing and the cockpit of the Y-wing.
However, this design was scrapped for the T-47, which featured no elements from previous craft.
Johnston's designs for the Snowspeeders have influenced later Star Wars designers, such as Tommy Lee Edwards.
The models were built in three different scales by Steve Gawley, Charlie Bailey, and Mike Fulmer of ILM, with the smallest (20 inches) used for motion control photography, and the largest (2½ feet) for hero and pyrotechnic shots.
All models included motor-controlled flaps to imply maneuverability, and the largest version also possessed motor-articulated crew Several full-scale props were built in London for the hangar, cockpit, and speeder crash scenes.

DepictionAccording to background sources, the Rebel Alliance received a small squadron of modified T-47 airspeeders – aircraft which utilize repulsorlifts to achieve flight – shortly after establishing Echo Base on Hoth.

These civilian speeders, originally meant for retrieving and hauling cargo sleds with their tow cables, were converted for military use by bolting on a pair of laser cannons with accompanying power converters and laser generator system.

Additional armor plating was also added on to increase protection; this armor was originally carried by Y-wing starfighters but removed by Rebel technicians to ease maintenance.

These modifications made the T-47 a highly maneuverable short-range attack craft which uses its speed and agility to avoid being hit.

However, the intense environment of Hoth initially proved too hostile to these T-47s as the cold temperatures would cause their power generators to lock up.

Only after Rebel mechanics modified the heat radiator fins at the back of the ships to make them less efficient was this problem resolved and they become more commonly known as snowspeeders.
In The Empire Strikes Back, Rogue Squadron, led by Commander Luke Skywalker (Mark Hamill), pilots snowspeeders against Imperial AT-AT walkers during the Battle of Hoth.

However, when the snowspeeders' weaponry proves incapable of piercing the assault walkers' thick armoring, Luke devises the unconventional strategy of using their tow cables to entangle the AT-ATs.

Although Luke's gunner, Dak Ralter, is killed before he can try the maneuver himself, Wedge Antilles and Wes Janson succeed in tripping up an AT-AT with their snowspeeder and destroying it with a well-placed shot to its neck.

While ultimately the Rebels lose the Battle of Hoth, the snowspeeder earns an honored place in the history books for the role it played.

MerchandiseKenner released a toy snowspeeder in 1980.
Kenner re-released an updated version utilizing the same mold in 1995 for their new 'Power of the Force' line.

After Hasbro shut down the Kenner offices in 1999, it was released several times under Hasbro's brand name: in 2001 as a Wal-Mart exclusive in the "Power of the Jedi" collection, in 2006 as a Target exclusive in the "Saga Collection" line, and three versions of it in the 2010 "The Vintage Collection", including a Target exclusive packaged as the original 1980 Kenner version.
LEGO has also sold snowspeeder models, and Snowspeeder models used in The Empire Strikes Back have been sold online.
Hasbro's Star Wars Transformers line included a Snowspeeder that transformed into Luke Skywalker.

In 2009, Japanese model manufacturer Fine Molds released a 1/48 scale kit of the Snowspeeder.

===
Speeder bike ===
Speeder bikes first appear in a chase scene in Return of the Jedi and have appeared in various other Star Wars media.

Related vehicles called 'swoop bikes' have also appeared in Star Wars films and other media.

== Vehicles appearing in the Prequel Trilogy ==


===
Armored Assault Tank (AAT) ===
The AAT is a Trade Federation vehicle that appears in The Phantom Menace, Revenge of the Sith, and other Star Wars media.
Early drafts of The Phantom Menace described the Trade Federation's invasion of Naboo being led by "armored attack craft" that resembled helicopters.
George Lucas narrowed down the AAT's design after looking at two different drawings from ILM design director Doug Chiang - one tank-like and the other shaped like a flying spade - and deciding it would be interesting to combine the two together.
The final version's forward curve is based on the curve of a shovel, and parts of it are intended to suggest animalistic traits.
LEGO released an AAT model in 2001.In-universe reference material describes the AAT as a battle tank designed specifically for head-on combat, with a very heavily-armored front and a nose of almost solid armor so it can crash through heavy walls.

First manufactured for the Trade Federation by the Baktoid Armor Workshop, the AAT floats above the ground thanks to anti-gravity "repulsorlift" technology and can achieve a top speed of 55 km/h (34 mph).

At 9.75 m (32.0 ft) long, the AAT is crewed by four battle droids: a commander, a pilot and two gunners.

Up to six additional battle droids can use handholds on either side of the tank's body to ride into battle.

It is heavily armed with a primary turret-mounted heavy laser cannon; matching pairs of anti-personnel laser cannons and laser rangefinders which extend out either side on stalks; and two forward-facing short-ranged blaster cannons in the tank's main body.

The base of the tank also incorporates six energized projectile launchers which carry three main ammunition types: "bunker-buster" high explosive shells, armor-piercing shells and high-energy shells.

When fired, these shells are cocooned in high-energy plasma which reduces air friction and improves penetration.

In order to reload the launchers though, the entire "foot" of the AAT must be removed and a loaded replacement installed using mechanical facilities.

===
Bongo Submarine ===
The Gungan "bongo" submarine is a transport in The Phantom Menace.
Obi-Wan Kenobi (Ewan McGregor),
Qui-Gon Jinn (Liam Neeson), and Jar Jar Binks (Ahmed Best)
use a bongo to travel from the underwater city of Otah Gunga to the Naboo capital of Theed.

Industrial Light & Magic's Doug Chiang devised the submarine's squid-like propeller design.
This assembly was then merged with the design for a manta-shaped underwater transport written out of an earlier draft of the story.
This design replaced earlier concepts that depicted the Gungan vessel as an organic-looking diving bell.

Practical and CGI models of the Gungan vessel were built, as well as a full-size set for the actors to work in.
Within the Star Wars universe, the Bongo is described as being organically grown by secret Gungan techniques and so no two are exactly alike.

The submersible piloted by Jar-Jar, Obi-Wan and Qua-Gon was a Tribubble bongo 15 m
(49 ft) long and manufactured by the Otoh Gunga Bongmeken Cooperative.

It used hydrostatic bubble shields to keep the cockpit and cargo areas dry and filled with air.

The cluster of semi-rigid electromotive tentacles at the submersible's rear could propel it to a top speed of 85 km/h (53 mph).

It was unarmed but in an emergency the cockpit section could detach from the rest of the submersible as an escape pod.

===
Clone turbo tank (HAVw A6 Juggernaut) ===
The turbo tank is a ten-wheeled battle tank and armored personnel carrier that appears in Revenge of the Sith and is based on designs done by Joe Johnston for use in The Empire Strikes Back.
West End Games based their "HAVw A5 Juggernaut" design on Johnson's sketches.
The larger, more heavily armed vehicle that appears in Revenge of the Sith is labeled "HAVw A6".
The clone turbo tank, more formally the HAVw A6 Juggernaut, is described in Star Wars sources as being built by Kuat Drive Yards to serve as a heavily armed and armored military transport for the Republic during the Clone Wars.

Measuring 49.4 m (162 ft)
long, 19.6 m (64 ft) wide and 30.4 m (100 ft)
high, the massive tank can carry as many as 300 clone troopers into battle depending on internal configuration.

Each of the Juggernaut's ten wheels consists of three independently spinning segments and utilize independent suspension to travel across nearly any terrain.

Designed to absorb enemy fire, they help the tank achieve a maximum speed of 160 km/h (99 mph).
A crew of 12 operates the Juggernaut and can control it from cockpits located at either end of the tank.

The Juggernaut's nearly impregnable armor plating is thermally superconductive to absorb and spread heat over a wider area.

For weaponry it is equipped with a heavy laser cannon turret and rapid-repeating heavy laser cannon turret on the roof; two side-mounted medium antipersonnel laser cannons that extend out from either side of the hull; two twin antipersonnel blaster cannons under the 'forward' cockpit; and two retractable rocket/grenade launchers.
After the end of the Clone Wars, the tank continues to serve the Galactic Empire.

A later model, the HCVw A9, appears in Rogue One: A Star Wars Story being used as a prisoner transport carrying Jyn Erso (Felicity Jones).

===
Corporate Alliance tank droid ===
Corporate Alliance tank droids appear in Revenge of the Sith and have appeared in other Star Wars media, including as playable vehicles in Battlefront II.
This "snail droid" was originally designed for Star Wars: Episode II – Attack of the Clones for the climatic Battle of Geonosis, but they did not make it into the final cut of the film.
Formally identified in background material as the NR-N99 Persuader-class droid enforcer, these tanks are manufactured by the Techno Union and primarily used by the Corporate Alliance, which sides with the Separatists during the Clone Wars.

This 10.9 m (36 ft)-long tank is designed to function on its own with a built-in droid brain, though it can also be controlled by a pilot battle droid.

Consisting of a huge central tread and forward-mounted outriggers, the tank droid can cross almost any terrain with ease and achieve a top speed of 60 km/h (37 mph).

Its weaponry includes two heavy repeating blasters, two ion cannons, and missile launchers.

===
Dwarf spider droid ===
The Dwarf spider droid is first seen being used by the Confederacy of Independent Systems in Attack of the Clones during the Battle of Geonosis and have featured in other Star Wars media.
Hasbro released a spider droid figure in 2003.The DSD1 dwarf spider droid, as it is identified in background material, is essentially a walking cannon with a droid brain, built by the Baktoid Armor Workshop to fight for the Separatists during the Clone Wars.

Standing only 1.9 m
(6 ft 3 in) tall, it is also known as the burrowing spider droid for its ability to fit in tight spaces.

Its primary weapon is a long blaster cannon capable of firing at different intensities and rates of fire, though it can also willingly utilize a self-destruct device to blow up the enemy.

A pair of infrared photoreceptors on the armored brain casing allow the spider droid to see its surroundings while four articulated legs are designed to affix to the sides of cliffs so it may climb difficult terrain.

It can achieve a maximum speed of 90 km/h (56 mph).

=== HMP Droid gunship ===
Droid gunships appear at the Battle of Kashyyyk in Revenge of the Sith and Star Wars: Battlefront II.
Their circular shape is designed to be reminiscent of the Trade Federation ships seen in The Phantom Menace.
These ships were originally intended to appear in the movie's opening space battle, but were ultimately depicted as aircraft.
Described by in-universe material as the Separatist counterpart to the Republic's LAAT, the Heavy Missile Platform droid gunship (or HMP Predator) is a heavily armed repulsorlift airspeeder which can be adapted for a wide range of mission profiles.

Mass-produced by Baktoid Fleet Ordnance on numerous worlds, the HMP is controlled by an advanced droid brain and measures 12.4 m (41 ft) long, 11 m (36 ft)
wide and 3.1 m (10 ft) high.

The gunship possesses a top speed of 600 km/h (370 mph).
However it is considered relatively slow and with average maneuverability, compensated for by its ability to unleash incredible firepower and strong deflector shields.

Its weaponry can be changed out depending on what's needed, but standard armament includes a chin-mounted medium laser cannon, two twin laser cannon turrets, wingtip-mounted light laser cannons, and fourteen missiles fitted with variable payloads including high explosive, EMP, incendiary and hard radiation.

The gunship can also be modified to serve as a troop carrier for battle droids.

===
Flash speeder ===
The Naboo Royal Security Forces use Flash speeders in The Phantom Menace.

===
Gian speeder ===
The Naboo Royal Security Forces use Gian speeders in The Phantom Menace.

They are larger, heavier counterparts to the NRSF Flash Speeders, and are used mainly for skirmishes against pirates and smugglers.
However, they are still modified civilian landspeeeders, and prove relatively useless against Trade Federation tanks.
They are painted purple, carry one medium blaster cannon, and have seating for four NRSF officers.
They also have light armour plating for protection against hand-held blasters, but there is little protection for the vehicles occupants.

===
Hailfire droid tank ===
Hailfire droids are mobile missile platforms that appear in Attack of the Clones during the Battle of Geonosis and have featured in other Star Wars media associated with the Clone Wars.

In-universe material identifies them as IG-227 Hailfire-class droid tanks produced by Haor Chall Engineering and commissioned for the InterGalactic Banking Clan prior to the Clone Wars to assist with debt collection.

Standing 6.8 m
(22 ft) tall and capable of 45 km/h (28 mph), they consist of two large wheels with a low-fixed base on which is mounted a targeting photoreceptor, twin chin-mounted blaster cannons, and two missile launchers.

Each launcher can carry up to 15 missiles, which have an effective range of less than one kilometre following deliberately evasive trajectories to their target.

Although an effective platform against both ground and air targets, the Hailfire was phased out during the Clone Wars because of its limited ammunition supply.

===
Homing spider droid ===
The OG-9 homing spider droid appears in Attack of the Clones during the Battle of Geonosis and features in other Star Wars media, including as a playable vehicle in Battlefront II.
During post-production, the droid was referred to as "Commerce Guild droid B.
"  Referred to in source material as the OG-9 homing spider droid, these droid walking tanks were manufactured by Baktoid Armor Workshop for the Commerce Guild to enforce their contracts.

It consists of an armored reactor core body attached to four armored legs, giving it a height of 7.3 m (24 ft).

While the legs are thin they are tougher than they look, allowing the droid to traverse nearly any terrain and achieve a top speed of 90 km/h (56 mph).

Its primary weapons are two dish-shaped laser cannons mounted on the top and bottom of the reactor core: the top-mounted cannon primarily releases sustains bursts to wear down deflector shields, while the bottom cannon suppresses enemy infantry.

=== Multi-troop transport (MTT) ===
The Multi-Troop Transports or MTTs made their first appearance in The Phantom Menace, carrying and deploying Trade Federation battle droids during the invasion of Naboo.
As with the AAT, parts of the MTT are intended to suggest animalistic traits.
Lucas requested the MTT have locomotive-type qualities and be capable of knocking down everything in its path; consequently, the MTT has battering rams and locomotive components.

Although the MTT was primarily created using computer-generated imagery (CGI), a scale model was also built to film certain scenes of The Phantom Menace, combining elements of practical and digital special effects.
Fictional background for the MTT explains it was originally produced by Baktoid Armor Workshop, the same manufacturer of the Trade Federation's AAT.

Measuring 31 m
(102 ft) long and 3 m (9.8 ft)
tall, the MTT is designed to deploy in traditional battle lines, hence its strong frontal armor.

Although floating above the ground on heavy-duty "repulsorlift" engines, the MTT is a lumbering vehicle with a top speed of only 35 km/h (22 mph).

A crew of five battle droids operate the MTT and it is armed with a pair of twin 17kv antipersonnel blaster cannons, but its primary purpose is to carry 112 battle droids into battle.

These are stored folded-up on an articulated deployment rack, which extends forward out of the MTT's bulbous front end via troop deployment hatch.

During the Clone Wars, MTTS were modified to carry larger Super Battle Droids as well.
=== Podracer ===
Podracers are high-speed one-man race craft.
Anakin Skywalker (Jake Lloyd) enters and wins a podrace in The Phantom Menace.
It consists of forward turbines attached loosely to the cockpit by a series of cables with the turbines attached to each other by an ion beam.
It was frequently gambled upon and was considered by many, including Qui-Gon Jinn, to be a dangerous sport.

The video games
Star Wars
Episode
I: Racer, Star Wars: Racer Arcade and Star Wars Racer Revenge are based on The Phantom Menace's podracing scenes.

===
Republic assault gunboat ===
The Republic assault gunboat appears in Revenge of the Sith.
The vehicle went through several changes over the course of its development:
it was originally a Confederacy capital ship, then became the "Good Guy A" support ship for the Republic.
It became a Confederacy ship once more before being scaled down, turned into a speeder, and becoming a Republic craft.

===
Republic LAAT Gunship ===
The Low-Altitude Assault Transports (LAATs) are Galactic Republic airborne attack transport and multirole-ground attack gunships that appears in Attack of the Clones, Revenge of the Sith
, Star Wars:
The Clone Wars, Star Wars: Battlefront, and Star Wars: Republic Commando, ferrying clone troopers, Jedi, and military hardware during battle.
The Expanded Universe describes the LAAT as a versatile multi-role aerospace crafts capable of reconfigured for the gunship, transport, starfighter, and bomber combat roles.
There are numerous LAAT variants: the LAAT/i infantry transport, the LAAT/c cargo carrier, the LAAT/s stealth special forces, the LAAT/le law enforcement for military police, and LAAT/v vehicle tactical airlift that carried AT-TEs.
Lucas turned to footage of helicopter-troop deployment when conceiving the LAAT; the vehicle was originally labeled the "Jedi attack helicopter".
The vehicle's ultimate appearance is based on the Russian Mil Mi-24 helicopter.
The craft's engine sounds are the modified sound of a Vickers Vimy, a World War I bomber.
Both Hasbro and Lego released LAAT models in 2002; Lego released another LAAT in 2008.
Code 3 Collectibles released a die-cast gunship two years later.
Within the Star Wars universe, these repulsorlift gunships were built by Rothana Heavy Engineering to serve a vital role as atmospheric transports and escorts for the Republic during the Clone Wars.

The standard LAAT/i gunship (Low Altitude Assault Transport/infantry), measuring 17.4 m (57 ft) long (clearance with guns) and 6.1 m (20 ft)
deep with a 17 m (56 ft) wingspan, can carry a platoon of 30 clone troopers with storage racks for several speeder bikes.

With a maximum air speed of 620 km/h (390 mph), the LAAT was designed specifically with low-atmosphere flight in mind, giving it an advantage engaging enemy starfighters which give up their speed advantage when fighting below mountain level.

Later models however were adapted to allow short trips in deep space.

The gunship's weaponry includes three antipersonnel laser cannons on swivel turrets, two forward and one rear; four composite-beam laser turrets, two mounted on the wings and two on ball turrets extending from either side; two mass driver missile launchers which can accelerate a variety of missiles at up to hypersonic velocities; and eight light air-to-air rockets carried on underwing hardpoints.

The LAAT/
i is crewed by a pilot, copilot/gunner, and two auxiliary turret gunners.

It also carries a variety of emergency supplies, including an IM-6 Battlefield Medical Droid, collapsible repulsor stretchers, and inflatable decontamination tents.
Another variant, the LAAT/c (Low Altitude Assault Transport/carrier), is crewed by a single pilot and armed with just the nose-mounted cannons, but features a pair of magnetic clamps that can quickly ferry cargo or AT-TEs into battle.

===
Self-propelled heavy artillery (SPHA) ===
Self-propelled heavy artillery first appear in Attack of the Clones during the Battle of Geonosis.
The vehicle was initially designed on treads, but George Lucas suggested that it be equipped with legs like the AT-TEs that fight alongside it.
The SPHA was referred to as "Clone Tank A" during production.

Source material identifies the SPHA as one of the biggest ground guns in the Republic's arsenals during the Clone Wars, operated by a crew of 30 clone troopers.

At 140.2 m (460 ft) long, the SPHA is slow but steady, reaching speeds of up to 35 km/h (22 mph) on 12 articulate legs though it must remain stationary to fire its weapon.

The SPHA-T is armed with a heavy turbolaser cannon powerful enough to destroy a starship, though firing it requires vast amounts of energy which can quickly drain
the SPHA-T.


===
Single Trooper Aerial Platform (STAP) ===
STAPs, which first appeared in The Phantom Menace and have featured in other Star Wars media, are designed to appear reminiscent of the speeder bikes seen in Return of the Jedi.
The STAP's design also relates back to Lucas' 1973 idea of ridable "jet-sticks" which appeared in early drafts of the original Star Wars movie.

A draft of The Phantom Menace refers to the vehicles as STAPS, or Single Troop Armed Pogo Sticks.
These lightweight reconnaissance vehicles are based in-universe on civilian vehicles called airhooks, modified for greater performance and to be piloted by the Trade Federation's battle droids.

Floating above the ground thanks to "repulsorlift" technology, a pair of drive turbines on either side of the vertical stem gives it impressive speed and maneuverability.

Though armed with a pair of blaster cannons, the STAP leaves its pilot completely exposed, making it ill-suit for heavy battle.

===
Swamp speeder ===
Swamp speeders appear in Revenge of the Sith during battle scenes on Felucia and Kashyyyk.
TJ Frame, who worked on the swamp speeder concept soon after joining the art department, initially designed the craft to be appear reminiscent of fanboats.

Within the Star Wars universe these vehicles are known as Infantry Support Platform (ISP) speeders, built for the Republic during the Clone Wars by Uulshos Manufacturing.

ISPs use repulsorlifts and a powerful turbofan to patrol swampy regions, leading to their nickname, although they can be used on almost any terrain.

Operated by two clone troopers and armed with a pair of twin swiveling blaster cannons, the ISP can move at speeds of up to 100 km/h (62 mph).

===
Wheel bike ===
General Grievous rides a wheel bike in Revenge of the Sith during his confrontation with Obi-Wan Kenobi (Ewan McGregor).
Grievous' vehicle is similar to another wheel bike that appears in the Star Wars:
Droids cartoon.
One concept for Grievous' vehicle was for it to include "tank-like chariots"; at another point, the vehicle was going to be another droid.
Grievous' wheel bike is identified in Star Wars source material as a TSMEU-6 personal wheel bike built by the Z-Gomot Ternbuell Guppat Corporation.

Wheel bikes are described as being primarily used during mining operations, however they are also popular as modified weapons platforms on the second-hand market.

The TSMEU-6 is 3.5 m (11 ft)
long with a wheel diameter of 2.5 m (8 ft 2 in) and four retractable legs for navigating difficult terrain.

With the legs retracted the wheel bike has a maximum speed of 330 km/h (210 mph), while in walking mode the bike can only attain 10 km/h (6.2 mph).

Overall
the bike has enough fuel to travel 500 km (310 mi).

While normally carrying a driver and passenger, Grevious' bike has had the passenger seat replaced with a heavy double laser cannon; both seat and cannon remain stable while the wheel rotates around them.

===
Wookiee flying catamaran ===
Wookiee flying catamarans appear in Revenge of the Sith.
They were originally conceived as strictly water vehicles.
The addition of a rotor came late in production; some printed works do not depict this component.

===
Wookiee ornithopter ==
=
Wookiee ornithopters appear in Revenge of the Sith.
The craft was originally known as the "dragonfly helicopter".
Although mostly depicted through computer-generated imagery, a full-size mockup of the gunner's seat was created for a closeup of the tail gunner.

== Vehicles appearing in other Star Wars media ==


===
Imperial Assault Tank ===
The Imperial Assault Tank is a ground vehicle which made its theatrical debut in Rogue One: A Star Wars Story patrolling the streets of Jedha's Old City and has appeared in other media including Star Wars Rebels.

The life-sized model which appeared on the Rogue
One set was based on a heavily modified flatbed Alvis Stormer piloted by experienced tank operators.

Although the tank had initially been intended to be a hover vehicle, it was decided to keep the treads after production.
Official sources identify the vehicle as the TX-225 "Occupier" combat assault tank manufactured by Rothana Heavy Engineering for the Galactic Empire.

Measuring 7.3 m (24 ft)
long and 1.82 m (
6 ft 0 in) high, this ground assault vehicle (GAV) can reach a top speed of 72 km/h (45 mph) on open roads and is crewed by a tank commander, driver, and gunner/technician.

Its armament includes a pair of elevating twin Dymek Mk2e/w medium laser cannons for antiarmor & antiaircraft use and a forward-locked twin Dymek MK 2e/w medium laser cannon for antipersonnel use.

Composite laminate armoring makes the tank remarkably resilient without overtaxing its propulsion system.

Two variants of the "Occupier" are employed by the Empire: the standard TX-225 GAVw utilizing a continuous track which makes it highly maneuverable in urban environments, and the TX-225 GAVr which hovers slightly above the ground on repulsorlifts.

===
Imperial Troop Transport ===
The Imperial Trooper Transport is a vehicle which made its television debut in Star Wars Rebels and has appeared in other Star Wars media including The Mandalorian.

According to official sources, the K79-S80 Imperial Troop Transport (ITT) is an armored troop transport which uses repulsorlift technology to deliver Stormtroopers into battle.

Manufactured by Ubrikkian Industries, the ITT measures 8.7 m (29 ft)
long and can achieve a top speed of 150 km/h (93 mph).

Although not designed specifically for combat, the ITT is armed with two forward-facing laser guns and a roof-mounted twin laser turret to defend itself.

In addition to carrying troops the ITT is also used to ferry supplies or prisoners between locations; the cargo racks on either side of the ITT double as holding compartments for publicly displaying prisoners as a warning to others.

==
Bibliography ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Index of Vehicle Archive at starwars.com
List of vehicles on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Intricate Illustrations of Star Wars Spacecraft Cutouts Reveal Their Inner Mechanics by Leah Pellegrini April 23, 2016
The following is a list of fictional Star Wars terrestrial vehicles, including armoured fighting vehicles, military aircraft, and naval ships.

== Vehicles appearing in the Original Trilogy ==


===
All Terrain Armored Transport (AT-AT) ===
The All Terrain Armored Transport, or AT-AT walker, is a quadruped mechanized infantry combat vehicle used by the Imperial ground forces.
Standing over 20 metres (66 ft) tall with blast-impervious armour plating, these massive constructs are used as much for psychological effect as they are for tactical advantage.
The AT-AT (pronounced either casually as 'at at', or  using only the letters 'A.T. A.T.') was first introduced in The Empire Strikes Back (as the Galactic Empire's main units against Rebel Alliance infantry during the Battle of Hoth) and also appears in Return of the Jedi (as the vehicle used to transport Luke Skywalker and Darth Vader to their shuttle on the forest moon of Endor) and in Rogue One (in the AT-ACT variant, used to respond to the attacks of Rebel infantrymen of the Rogue One unit during the Battle of Scarif, although later defeated by the arriving Rebel Red Squadron of starfighers).
The AT-AT also appears in a destroyed form in Star Wars:
The Force Awakens, explained in the video game Star Wars Battlefront (2015) to be a residue of the Battle of Jakku, which was the Empire's last defeat and resulted in its dissolution.
Modified forms appear in The Last Jedi (used by the First Order to attack Resistance forces in a former Rebel base).

===
All Terrain Scout Transport (AT-ST) ===
The All Terrain Scout Transport (AT-ST) is a two-legged mech walker introduced briefly in The Empire Strikes Back and featured extensively in Return of the Jedi.
These vehicles were designed to screen and protect the flanks of slower moving AT-ATs and the larger tanks used by the Empire.

Due to their design and movement, they are often dubbed as a "chicken walker".

The name Scout Walker is also used to refer to an AT-ST.

This name was used for the official toy instead of the AT-ST name.

An AT-ST also appears briefly in Rogue One: A Star Wars Story, patrolling Jedha City following an attack by Saw Gerrera's forces.

A modified AT-ST later appears in The Mandalorian under the possession of a group of raiders, as the Empire has ceased to exist by the time of the series.

An updated model of the AT-ST is used by the First Order in The Last Jedi.
Shortly before the film's climax, an AT-ST is commandeered by BB-8.
===
Cloud car ===
Cloud cars fly around Bespin's Cloud City in The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi.
Compositing the cloud cars into the original releases required multiple motion control passes to prevent the vehicles from standing out too distinctly from their cloudy background.
Cloud cars were designed to have two cockpits that were interconnected with a small compartment block.
It was often a red-orange color with each cockpit arranged in a "shoe-shape" with the glass being on the "tongue" of the cockpit.
Like the rest of Cloud City, cloud cars were designed to reflect a more refined art deco style.

The scale models originally created for the movies were made of plastic parts using the then-new method of vacuum forming.

Cloud cars inserted into the films' Special Edition releases were computer-generated.
Within the Star Wars universe, these cloud cars (formally identified as Storm IV Twin-Pod models) were built by Bespin Motors specifically as atmospheric patrol craft.

The unusual vehicles consist of two separate pods connected together, one for a pilot and the other for a gunner.

It can achieve low orbit and attain speeds of 1,500 km/h (930 mph) thanks to a combination of repulsorlift drive and ion engine.

Each pod is armed with a light blaster cannon and protected with armor plating and an armored canopy.

While normally the port-side pod houses the pilot and starboard-side houses
the gunner, both pods contain all the equipment necessary to fulfill either role in the event one is damaged.

===
Desert Skiff ===
A pair of skiffs travel with Jabba's sail barge in Return of the Jedi.
The skiff was originally conceived as a flying animal carrying strapped-on passenger modules.
It was modified to be a nautical-type vehicle, and then transitioned to become more utilitarian.
A full-size skiff was built alongside the sail barge in Yuma.
An 81-centimeter miniature was also built, and it was "crewed" by poseable puppets.
Skiffs are a common mode of transport on many Star Wars worlds as per in-universe sources, utilizing repulsorlift technology to move cargo and passengers on the cheap.

The Bantha II-cargo skiffs seen in Return of the Jedi are also a favorite of various criminal organizations, which use them for raids and prisoner exchanges.

Built by Ubrikkian Industries, they are 9.5 m (31 ft) long, with an armored bow to withstand head-on collisions, and can reach speeds of 250 km/h (160 mph).

===
Jabba's Sail Barge (Khetanna) ===
A sail barge delivers Jabba the Hutt and his entourage to the sarlacc pit in Return of the Jedi.
Illustrator Ralph McQuarrie designed the ship to appear more utilitarian in comparison to early designs, which made the ship reminiscent of a Baroque sea craft.

Joe Johnston continued working on the design after McQuarrie stepped away from the project.
A 30,000-square-foot (2,800 m2) full-scale sail barge set was erected in Yuma, Arizona; it was one of the largest Star Wars sets created.

Measuring 150 feet long, 130 feet wide and 65 feet high, the sail barge set was supported by 130 wooden posts, each 27 feet high, which were deeply embedded into the ground.

Underneath the barge
were several offices and a commissary which could feed 150 people.

In order to get to the set, a two-mile road made of compacted sand was built, requiring roughly 80,000 gallons of water to construct.
According to Star Wars references, Jabba's sail barge is named the Khetanna and was built by Ubrikkian Industries as a pleasure barge for the crime lord.

At 30 m (98 ft) long, it is powered by a repulsorlift engine to reach a maximum speed of 100 km/h (62 mph) but can also use its two sails to slowly travel by air power.

While designed purely as a pleasure barge, the Khetanna is fitted with a laser cannon turret and heavy blasters can be mounted on the railings.

===
Landspeeder ===
Landspeeders are antigravity vehicles that appear throughout the films and Expanded Universe in both civilian and military roles.
They appear in Star Wars:
Episode IV – A New Hope.
===
Sandcrawler ===
C-3PO (Anthony Daniels) and R2-D2 (Kenny Baker) are briefly held in a Jawa sandcrawler in Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope.
Shots of the sandcrawler at a distance were actually a matte painting; only two of its treads and a 27-meter-long piece of its lower structure were actually built.
For shots involving the vehicle's movement, ILM used a 125-centimeter radio-controlled model.
A computer-generated sandcrawler briefly appears in The Phantom Menace, and a sandcrawler also appears in Attack of the Clones.
Sandcrawler-related merchandise include a Lego model, card game items, and Hasbro and Micro Machines toys.

===
Skyhopper ===
An Incom Corporation T-16 skyhopper appears in the background of the Lars residence in A New Hope, and Luke Skywalker (Mark Hamill) races a skyhopper in National Public Radio's radio adaptation of that movie; a skyhopper also appears at the end of the Special Edition release of Return of the Jedi.
The skyhopper model that Skywalker handles in A New Hope is the concept model Colin Cantwell built; budget limitations allowed only a partial full-size mock-up of the craft to be built.
In Star Wars: Rebel Assault, skyhoppers are used by Rebel pilots to train in Tatooine's Beggar's canyon.

===
Snowspeeder (T-47 Airspeeder) ===
A T-47 airspeeder, better known as "snowspeeder", is a Rebel Alliance vehicle featured in The Empire Strikes Back (1980) and
several books, comics, and video games in the Star Wars Expanded Universe and also in Atari game cartridges in the 80's.
Snowspeeder models and replicas have been merchandised by several companies.

Origin and designDuring production of The Empire Strikes Back, designer Joe Johnston conceived a ship that combined the body of an X-wing and the cockpit of the Y-wing.
However, this design was scrapped for the T-47, which featured no elements from previous craft.
Johnston's designs for the Snowspeeders have influenced later Star Wars designers, such as Tommy Lee Edwards.
The models were built in three different scales by Steve Gawley, Charlie Bailey, and Mike Fulmer of ILM, with the smallest (20 inches) used for motion control photography, and the largest (2½ feet) for hero and pyrotechnic shots.
All models included motor-controlled flaps to imply maneuverability, and the largest version also possessed motor-articulated crew Several full-scale props were built in London for the hangar, cockpit, and speeder crash scenes.

DepictionAccording to background sources, the Rebel Alliance received a small squadron of modified T-47 airspeeders – aircraft which utilize repulsorlifts to achieve flight – shortly after establishing Echo Base on Hoth.

These civilian speeders, originally meant for retrieving and hauling cargo sleds with their tow cables, were converted for military use by bolting on a pair of laser cannons with accompanying power converters and laser generator system.

Additional armor plating was also added on to increase protection; this armor was originally carried by Y-wing starfighters but removed by Rebel technicians to ease maintenance.

These modifications made the T-47 a highly maneuverable short-range attack craft which uses its speed and agility to avoid being hit.

However, the intense environment of Hoth initially proved too hostile to these T-47s as the cold temperatures would cause their power generators to lock up.

Only after Rebel mechanics modified the heat radiator fins at the back of the ships to make them less efficient was this problem resolved and they become more commonly known as snowspeeders.
In The Empire Strikes Back, Rogue Squadron, led by Commander Luke Skywalker (Mark Hamill), pilots snowspeeders against Imperial AT-AT walkers during the Battle of Hoth.

However, when the snowspeeders' weaponry proves incapable of piercing the assault walkers' thick armoring, Luke devises the unconventional strategy of using their tow cables to entangle the AT-ATs.

Although Luke's gunner, Dak Ralter, is killed before he can try the maneuver himself, Wedge Antilles and Wes Janson succeed in tripping up an AT-AT with their snowspeeder and destroying it with a well-placed shot to its neck.

While ultimately the Rebels lose the Battle of Hoth, the snowspeeder earns an honored place in the history books for the role it played.

MerchandiseKenner released a toy snowspeeder in 1980.
Kenner re-released an updated version utilizing the same mold in 1995 for their new 'Power of the Force' line.

After Hasbro shut down the Kenner offices in 1999, it was released several times under Hasbro's brand name: in 2001 as a Wal-Mart exclusive in the "Power of the Jedi" collection, in 2006 as a Target exclusive in the "Saga Collection" line, and three versions of it in the 2010 "The Vintage Collection", including a Target exclusive packaged as the original 1980 Kenner version.
LEGO has also sold snowspeeder models, and Snowspeeder models used in The Empire Strikes Back have been sold online.
Hasbro's Star Wars Transformers line included a Snowspeeder that transformed into Luke Skywalker.

In 2009, Japanese model manufacturer Fine Molds released a 1/48 scale kit of the Snowspeeder.

===
Speeder bike ===
Speeder bikes first appear in a chase scene in Return of the Jedi and have appeared in various other Star Wars media.

Related vehicles called 'swoop bikes' have also appeared in Star Wars films and other media.

== Vehicles appearing in the Prequel Trilogy ==


===
Armored Assault Tank (AAT) ===
The AAT is a Trade Federation vehicle that appears in The Phantom Menace, Revenge of the Sith, and other Star Wars media.
Early drafts of The Phantom Menace described the Trade Federation's invasion of Naboo being led by "armored attack craft" that resembled helicopters.
George Lucas narrowed down the AAT's design after looking at two different drawings from ILM design director Doug Chiang - one tank-like and the other shaped like a flying spade - and deciding it would be interesting to combine the two together.
The final version's forward curve is based on the curve of a shovel, and parts of it are intended to suggest animalistic traits.
LEGO released an AAT model in 2001.In-universe reference material describes the AAT as a battle tank designed specifically for head-on combat, with a very heavily-armored front and a nose of almost solid armor so it can crash through heavy walls.

First manufactured for the Trade Federation by the Baktoid Armor Workshop, the AAT floats above the ground thanks to anti-gravity "repulsorlift" technology and can achieve a top speed of 55 km/h (34 mph).

At 9.75 m (32.0 ft) long, the AAT is crewed by four battle droids: a commander, a pilot and two gunners.

Up to six additional battle droids can use handholds on either side of the tank's body to ride into battle.

It is heavily armed with a primary turret-mounted heavy laser cannon; matching pairs of anti-personnel laser cannons and laser rangefinders which extend out either side on stalks; and two forward-facing short-ranged blaster cannons in the tank's main body.

The base of the tank also incorporates six energized projectile launchers which carry three main ammunition types: "bunker-buster" high explosive shells, armor-piercing shells and high-energy shells.

When fired, these shells are cocooned in high-energy plasma which reduces air friction and improves penetration.

In order to reload the launchers though, the entire "foot" of the AAT must be removed and a loaded replacement installed using mechanical facilities.

===
Bongo Submarine ===
The Gungan "bongo" submarine is a transport in The Phantom Menace.
Obi-Wan Kenobi (Ewan McGregor),
Qui-Gon Jinn (Liam Neeson), and Jar Jar Binks (Ahmed Best)
use a bongo to travel from the underwater city of Otah Gunga to the Naboo capital of Theed.

Industrial Light & Magic's Doug Chiang devised the submarine's squid-like propeller design.
This assembly was then merged with the design for a manta-shaped underwater transport written out of an earlier draft of the story.
This design replaced earlier concepts that depicted the Gungan vessel as an organic-looking diving bell.

Practical and CGI models of the Gungan vessel were built, as well as a full-size set for the actors to work in.
Within the Star Wars universe, the Bongo is described as being organically grown by secret Gungan techniques and so no two are exactly alike.

The submersible piloted by Jar-Jar, Obi-Wan and Qua-Gon was a Tribubble bongo 15 m
(49 ft) long and manufactured by the Otoh Gunga Bongmeken Cooperative.

It used hydrostatic bubble shields to keep the cockpit and cargo areas dry and filled with air.

The cluster of semi-rigid electromotive tentacles at the submersible's rear could propel it to a top speed of 85 km/h (53 mph).

It was unarmed but in an emergency the cockpit section could detach from the rest of the submersible as an escape pod.

===
Clone turbo tank (HAVw A6 Juggernaut) ===
The turbo tank is a ten-wheeled battle tank and armored personnel carrier that appears in Revenge of the Sith and is based on designs done by Joe Johnston for use in The Empire Strikes Back.
West End Games based their "HAVw A5 Juggernaut" design on Johnson's sketches.
The larger, more heavily armed vehicle that appears in Revenge of the Sith is labeled "HAVw A6".
The clone turbo tank, more formally the HAVw A6 Juggernaut, is described in Star Wars sources as being built by Kuat Drive Yards to serve as a heavily armed and armored military transport for the Republic during the Clone Wars.

Measuring 49.4 m (162 ft)
long, 19.6 m (64 ft) wide and 30.4 m (100 ft)
high, the massive tank can carry as many as 300 clone troopers into battle depending on internal configuration.

Each of the Juggernaut's ten wheels consists of three independently spinning segments and utilize independent suspension to travel across nearly any terrain.

Designed to absorb enemy fire, they help the tank achieve a maximum speed of 160 km/h (99 mph).
A crew of 12 operates the Juggernaut and can control it from cockpits located at either end of the tank.

The Juggernaut's nearly impregnable armor plating is thermally superconductive to absorb and spread heat over a wider area.

For weaponry it is equipped with a heavy laser cannon turret and rapid-repeating heavy laser cannon turret on the roof; two side-mounted medium antipersonnel laser cannons that extend out from either side of the hull; two twin antipersonnel blaster cannons under the 'forward' cockpit; and two retractable rocket/grenade launchers.
After the end of the Clone Wars, the tank continues to serve the Galactic Empire.

A later model, the HCVw A9, appears in Rogue One: A Star Wars Story being used as a prisoner transport carrying Jyn Erso (Felicity Jones).

===
Corporate Alliance tank droid ===
Corporate Alliance tank droids appear in Revenge of the Sith and have appeared in other Star Wars media, including as playable vehicles in Battlefront II.
This "snail droid" was originally designed for Star Wars: Episode II – Attack of the Clones for the climatic Battle of Geonosis, but they did not make it into the final cut of the film.
Formally identified in background material as the NR-N99 Persuader-class droid enforcer, these tanks are manufactured by the Techno Union and primarily used by the Corporate Alliance, which sides with the Separatists during the Clone Wars.

This 10.9 m (36 ft)-long tank is designed to function on its own with a built-in droid brain, though it can also be controlled by a pilot battle droid.

Consisting of a huge central tread and forward-mounted outriggers, the tank droid can cross almost any terrain with ease and achieve a top speed of 60 km/h (37 mph).

Its weaponry includes two heavy repeating blasters, two ion cannons, and missile launchers.

===
Dwarf spider droid ===
The Dwarf spider droid is first seen being used by the Confederacy of Independent Systems in Attack of the Clones during the Battle of Geonosis and have featured in other Star Wars media.
Hasbro released a spider droid figure in 2003.The DSD1 dwarf spider droid, as it is identified in background material, is essentially a walking cannon with a droid brain, built by the Baktoid Armor Workshop to fight for the Separatists during the Clone Wars.

Standing only 1.9 m
(6 ft 3 in) tall, it is also known as the burrowing spider droid for its ability to fit in tight spaces.

Its primary weapon is a long blaster cannon capable of firing at different intensities and rates of fire, though it can also willingly utilize a self-destruct device to blow up the enemy.

A pair of infrared photoreceptors on the armored brain casing allow the spider droid to see its surroundings while four articulated legs are designed to affix to the sides of cliffs so it may climb difficult terrain.

It can achieve a maximum speed of 90 km/h (56 mph).

=== HMP Droid gunship ===
Droid gunships appear at the Battle of Kashyyyk in Revenge of the Sith and Star Wars: Battlefront II.
Their circular shape is designed to be reminiscent of the Trade Federation ships seen in The Phantom Menace.
These ships were originally intended to appear in the movie's opening space battle, but were ultimately depicted as aircraft.
Described by in-universe material as the Separatist counterpart to the Republic's LAAT, the Heavy Missile Platform droid gunship (or HMP Predator) is a heavily armed repulsorlift airspeeder which can be adapted for a wide range of mission profiles.

Mass-produced by Baktoid Fleet Ordnance on numerous worlds, the HMP is controlled by an advanced droid brain and measures 12.4 m (41 ft) long, 11 m (36 ft)
wide and 3.1 m (10 ft) high.

The gunship possesses a top speed of 600 km/h (370 mph).
However it is considered relatively slow and with average maneuverability, compensated for by its ability to unleash incredible firepower and strong deflector shields.

Its weaponry can be changed out depending on what's needed, but standard armament includes a chin-mounted medium laser cannon, two twin laser cannon turrets, wingtip-mounted light laser cannons, and fourteen missiles fitted with variable payloads including high explosive, EMP, incendiary and hard radiation.

The gunship can also be modified to serve as a troop carrier for battle droids.

===
Flash speeder ===
The Naboo Royal Security Forces use Flash speeders in The Phantom Menace.

===
Gian speeder ===
The Naboo Royal Security Forces use Gian speeders in The Phantom Menace.

They are larger, heavier counterparts to the NRSF Flash Speeders, and are used mainly for skirmishes against pirates and smugglers.
However, they are still modified civilian landspeeeders, and prove relatively useless against Trade Federation tanks.
They are painted purple, carry one medium blaster cannon, and have seating for four NRSF officers.
They also have light armour plating for protection against hand-held blasters, but there is little protection for the vehicles occupants.

===
Hailfire droid tank ===
Hailfire droids are mobile missile platforms that appear in Attack of the Clones during the Battle of Geonosis and have featured in other Star Wars media associated with the Clone Wars.

In-universe material identifies them as IG-227 Hailfire-class droid tanks produced by Haor Chall Engineering and commissioned for the InterGalactic Banking Clan prior to the Clone Wars to assist with debt collection.

Standing 6.8 m
(22 ft) tall and capable of 45 km/h (28 mph), they consist of two large wheels with a low-fixed base on which is mounted a targeting photoreceptor, twin chin-mounted blaster cannons, and two missile launchers.

Each launcher can carry up to 15 missiles, which have an effective range of less than one kilometre following deliberately evasive trajectories to their target.

Although an effective platform against both ground and air targets, the Hailfire was phased out during the Clone Wars because of its limited ammunition supply.

===
Homing spider droid ===
The OG-9 homing spider droid appears in Attack of the Clones during the Battle of Geonosis and features in other Star Wars media, including as a playable vehicle in Battlefront II.
During post-production, the droid was referred to as "Commerce Guild droid B.
"  Referred to in source material as the OG-9 homing spider droid, these droid walking tanks were manufactured by Baktoid Armor Workshop for the Commerce Guild to enforce their contracts.

It consists of an armored reactor core body attached to four armored legs, giving it a height of 7.3 m (24 ft).

While the legs are thin they are tougher than they look, allowing the droid to traverse nearly any terrain and achieve a top speed of 90 km/h (56 mph).

Its primary weapons are two dish-shaped laser cannons mounted on the top and bottom of the reactor core: the top-mounted cannon primarily releases sustains bursts to wear down deflector shields, while the bottom cannon suppresses enemy infantry.

=== Multi-troop transport (MTT) ===
The Multi-Troop Transports or MTTs made their first appearance in The Phantom Menace, carrying and deploying Trade Federation battle droids during the invasion of Naboo.
As with the AAT, parts of the MTT are intended to suggest animalistic traits.
Lucas requested the MTT have locomotive-type qualities and be capable of knocking down everything in its path; consequently, the MTT has battering rams and locomotive components.

Although the MTT was primarily created using computer-generated imagery (CGI), a scale model was also built to film certain scenes of The Phantom Menace, combining elements of practical and digital special effects.
Fictional background for the MTT explains it was originally produced by Baktoid Armor Workshop, the same manufacturer of the Trade Federation's AAT.

Measuring 31 m
(102 ft) long and 3 m (9.8 ft)
tall, the MTT is designed to deploy in traditional battle lines, hence its strong frontal armor.

Although floating above the ground on heavy-duty "repulsorlift" engines, the MTT is a lumbering vehicle with a top speed of only 35 km/h (22 mph).

A crew of five battle droids operate the MTT and it is armed with a pair of twin 17kv antipersonnel blaster cannons, but its primary purpose is to carry 112 battle droids into battle.

These are stored folded-up on an articulated deployment rack, which extends forward out of the MTT's bulbous front end via troop deployment hatch.

During the Clone Wars, MTTS were modified to carry larger Super Battle Droids as well.
=== Podracer ===
Podracers are high-speed one-man race craft.
Anakin Skywalker (Jake Lloyd) enters and wins a podrace in The Phantom Menace.
It consists of forward turbines attached loosely to the cockpit by a series of cables with the turbines attached to each other by an ion beam.
It was frequently gambled upon and was considered by many, including Qui-Gon Jinn, to be a dangerous sport.

The video games
Star Wars
Episode
I: Racer, Star Wars: Racer Arcade and Star Wars Racer Revenge are based on The Phantom Menace's podracing scenes.

===
Republic assault gunboat ===
The Republic assault gunboat appears in Revenge of the Sith.
The vehicle went through several changes over the course of its development:
it was originally a Confederacy capital ship, then became the "Good Guy A" support ship for the Republic.
It became a Confederacy ship once more before being scaled down, turned into a speeder, and becoming a Republic craft.

===
Republic LAAT Gunship ===
The Low-Altitude Assault Transports (LAATs) are Galactic Republic airborne attack transport and multirole-ground attack gunships that appears in Attack of the Clones, Revenge of the Sith
, Star Wars:
The Clone Wars, Star Wars: Battlefront, and Star Wars: Republic Commando, ferrying clone troopers, Jedi, and military hardware during battle.
The Expanded Universe describes the LAAT as a versatile multi-role aerospace crafts capable of reconfigured for the gunship, transport, starfighter, and bomber combat roles.
There are numerous LAAT variants: the LAAT/i infantry transport, the LAAT/c cargo carrier, the LAAT/s stealth special forces, the LAAT/le law enforcement for military police, and LAAT/v vehicle tactical airlift that carried AT-TEs.
Lucas turned to footage of helicopter-troop deployment when conceiving the LAAT; the vehicle was originally labeled the "Jedi attack helicopter".
The vehicle's ultimate appearance is based on the Russian Mil Mi-24 helicopter.
The craft's engine sounds are the modified sound of a Vickers Vimy, a World War I bomber.
Both Hasbro and Lego released LAAT models in 2002; Lego released another LAAT in 2008.
Code 3 Collectibles released a die-cast gunship two years later.
Within the Star Wars universe, these repulsorlift gunships were built by Rothana Heavy Engineering to serve a vital role as atmospheric transports and escorts for the Republic during the Clone Wars.

The standard LAAT/i gunship (Low Altitude Assault Transport/infantry), measuring 17.4 m (57 ft) long (clearance with guns) and 6.1 m (20 ft)
deep with a 17 m (56 ft) wingspan, can carry a platoon of 30 clone troopers with storage racks for several speeder bikes.

With a maximum air speed of 620 km/h (390 mph), the LAAT was designed specifically with low-atmosphere flight in mind, giving it an advantage engaging enemy starfighters which give up their speed advantage when fighting below mountain level.

Later models however were adapted to allow short trips in deep space.

The gunship's weaponry includes three antipersonnel laser cannons on swivel turrets, two forward and one rear; four composite-beam laser turrets, two mounted on the wings and two on ball turrets extending from either side; two mass driver missile launchers which can accelerate a variety of missiles at up to hypersonic velocities; and eight light air-to-air rockets carried on underwing hardpoints.

The LAAT/
i is crewed by a pilot, copilot/gunner, and two auxiliary turret gunners.

It also carries a variety of emergency supplies, including an IM-6 Battlefield Medical Droid, collapsible repulsor stretchers, and inflatable decontamination tents.
Another variant, the LAAT/c (Low Altitude Assault Transport/carrier), is crewed by a single pilot and armed with just the nose-mounted cannons, but features a pair of magnetic clamps that can quickly ferry cargo or AT-TEs into battle.

===
Self-propelled heavy artillery (SPHA) ===
Self-propelled heavy artillery first appear in Attack of the Clones during the Battle of Geonosis.
The vehicle was initially designed on treads, but George Lucas suggested that it be equipped with legs like the AT-TEs that fight alongside it.
The SPHA was referred to as "Clone Tank A" during production.

Source material identifies the SPHA as one of the biggest ground guns in the Republic's arsenals during the Clone Wars, operated by a crew of 30 clone troopers.

At 140.2 m (460 ft) long, the SPHA is slow but steady, reaching speeds of up to 35 km/h (22 mph) on 12 articulate legs though it must remain stationary to fire its weapon.

The SPHA-T is armed with a heavy turbolaser cannon powerful enough to destroy a starship, though firing it requires vast amounts of energy which can quickly drain
the SPHA-T.


===
Single Trooper Aerial Platform (STAP) ===
STAPs, which first appeared in The Phantom Menace and have featured in other Star Wars media, are designed to appear reminiscent of the speeder bikes seen in Return of the Jedi.
The STAP's design also relates back to Lucas' 1973 idea of ridable "jet-sticks" which appeared in early drafts of the original Star Wars movie.

A draft of The Phantom Menace refers to the vehicles as STAPS, or Single Troop Armed Pogo Sticks.
These lightweight reconnaissance vehicles are based in-universe on civilian vehicles called airhooks, modified for greater performance and to be piloted by the Trade Federation's battle droids.

Floating above the ground thanks to "repulsorlift" technology, a pair of drive turbines on either side of the vertical stem gives it impressive speed and maneuverability.

Though armed with a pair of blaster cannons, the STAP leaves its pilot completely exposed, making it ill-suit for heavy battle.

===
Swamp speeder ===
Swamp speeders appear in Revenge of the Sith during battle scenes on Felucia and Kashyyyk.
TJ Frame, who worked on the swamp speeder concept soon after joining the art department, initially designed the craft to be appear reminiscent of fanboats.

Within the Star Wars universe these vehicles are known as Infantry Support Platform (ISP) speeders, built for the Republic during the Clone Wars by Uulshos Manufacturing.

ISPs use repulsorlifts and a powerful turbofan to patrol swampy regions, leading to their nickname, although they can be used on almost any terrain.

Operated by two clone troopers and armed with a pair of twin swiveling blaster cannons, the ISP can move at speeds of up to 100 km/h (62 mph).

===
Wheel bike ===
General Grievous rides a wheel bike in Revenge of the Sith during his confrontation with Obi-Wan Kenobi (Ewan McGregor).
Grievous' vehicle is similar to another wheel bike that appears in the Star Wars:
Droids cartoon.
One concept for Grievous' vehicle was for it to include "tank-like chariots"; at another point, the vehicle was going to be another droid.
Grievous' wheel bike is identified in Star Wars source material as a TSMEU-6 personal wheel bike built by the Z-Gomot Ternbuell Guppat Corporation.

Wheel bikes are described as being primarily used during mining operations, however they are also popular as modified weapons platforms on the second-hand market.

The TSMEU-6 is 3.5 m (11 ft)
long with a wheel diameter of 2.5 m (8 ft 2 in) and four retractable legs for navigating difficult terrain.

With the legs retracted the wheel bike has a maximum speed of 330 km/h (210 mph), while in walking mode the bike can only attain 10 km/h (6.2 mph).

Overall
the bike has enough fuel to travel 500 km (310 mi).

While normally carrying a driver and passenger, Grevious' bike has had the passenger seat replaced with a heavy double laser cannon; both seat and cannon remain stable while the wheel rotates around them.

===
Wookiee flying catamaran ===
Wookiee flying catamarans appear in Revenge of the Sith.
They were originally conceived as strictly water vehicles.
The addition of a rotor came late in production; some printed works do not depict this component.

===
Wookiee ornithopter ==
=
Wookiee ornithopters appear in Revenge of the Sith.
The craft was originally known as the "dragonfly helicopter".
Although mostly depicted through computer-generated imagery, a full-size mockup of the gunner's seat was created for a closeup of the tail gunner.

== Vehicles appearing in other Star Wars media ==


===
Imperial Assault Tank ===
The Imperial Assault Tank is a ground vehicle which made its theatrical debut in Rogue One: A Star Wars Story patrolling the streets of Jedha's Old City and has appeared in other media including Star Wars Rebels.

The life-sized model which appeared on the Rogue
One set was based on a heavily modified flatbed Alvis Stormer piloted by experienced tank operators.

Although the tank had initially been intended to be a hover vehicle, it was decided to keep the treads after production.
Official sources identify the vehicle as the TX-225 "Occupier" combat assault tank manufactured by Rothana Heavy Engineering for the Galactic Empire.

Measuring 7.3 m (24 ft)
long and 1.82 m (
6 ft 0 in) high, this ground assault vehicle (GAV) can reach a top speed of 72 km/h (45 mph) on open roads and is crewed by a tank commander, driver, and gunner/technician.

Its armament includes a pair of elevating twin Dymek Mk2e/w medium laser cannons for antiarmor & antiaircraft use and a forward-locked twin Dymek MK 2e/w medium laser cannon for antipersonnel use.

Composite laminate armoring makes the tank remarkably resilient without overtaxing its propulsion system.

Two variants of the "Occupier" are employed by the Empire: the standard TX-225 GAVw utilizing a continuous track which makes it highly maneuverable in urban environments, and the TX-225 GAVr which hovers slightly above the ground on repulsorlifts.

===
Imperial Troop Transport ===
The Imperial Trooper Transport is a vehicle which made its television debut in Star Wars Rebels and has appeared in other Star Wars media including The Mandalorian.

According to official sources, the K79-S80 Imperial Troop Transport (ITT) is an armored troop transport which uses repulsorlift technology to deliver Stormtroopers into battle.

Manufactured by Ubrikkian Industries, the ITT measures 8.7 m (29 ft)
long and can achieve a top speed of 150 km/h (93 mph).

Although not designed specifically for combat, the ITT is armed with two forward-facing laser guns and a roof-mounted twin laser turret to defend itself.

In addition to carrying troops the ITT is also used to ferry supplies or prisoners between locations; the cargo racks on either side of the ITT double as holding compartments for publicly displaying prisoners as a warning to others.

==
Bibliography ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Index of Vehicle Archive at starwars.com
List of vehicles on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Intricate Illustrations of Star Wars Spacecraft Cutouts Reveal Their Inner Mechanics by Leah Pellegrini April 23, 2016
Speeder bikes (also known as "jumpspeeders" or "hover bikes") and swoop bikes (or just "swoops")
are small, fast transports that use repulsorlift engines in the fictional Star Wars universe.
Return of the Jedi includes a prominent speeder bike chase; speeders and swoops also appear in Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace, Star Wars:
Episode II – Attack of the Clones, Star Wars: Episode III – Revenge of the Sith, Star Wars:
Episode
IV - A New Hope (added in the 1997 Special Edition, but absent on every earlier print), the animated Star Wars Rebels TV series, and
the Star Wars expanded universe's books, comics, and games.

==
Origin and design ==
Various concept sketches came from producer George Lucas' call for a "rocket-powered scooter" in Return of the Jedi.
While Industrial Light & Magic's (ILM)
Nilo Rodis-Jamero designed a blocky vehicle with a large engine, Ralph McQuarrie's designs were more fanciful but with less of a sense of the vehicle's power source.
The final designs resulted in full-scale Imperial speeder bikes used by the actors for film against a bluescreen, along with miniatures mounted by articulated puppets.
ILM used a steadicam recording at 1 frame per second to record the speeder bikes' path through the forest moon of Endor—in reality, a California forest.
Playing the footage at the standard rate of 24 frames per second caused a blurring effect, which ILM used to simulate the vehicles' high speed; what was shot at 5 miles per hour (8.0 km/h) looked like 100 miles per hour (160 km/h).The BARC speeder in Revenge of the Sith was designed to appear like a predecessor to the speeder bikes in Return of the Jedi.
ILM's Doug Chiang designed Darth Maul's (Ray Park) speeder in The Phantom Menace to resemble a scythe, and Chiang's initial designs for the droid army's STAP vehicle resembled the speeder bikes from Return of the Jedi.
An all-CGI swoop appearing in A New Hope stems from a design created for Star Wars: Shadows of the Empire, and the swoop also appears briefly in The Phantom Menace.

== Depiction ==
In the Star Wars universe, speeder bikes are a type of "repulsorcraft," vehicles which use anti-gravity devices called repulsorlifts to hover above the surface of a planet.

Compared to other repulsorcraft, speeder bikes sacrifice unnecessary systems in order to achieve greater speed or agility.

Swoop bikes, being little more than an engine with seats, are similar but better suited for operating at higher altitudes.

In the Legends video game Knights of the Old Republic, Swoop racing is a main part of the story with your player having to work for The Hidden Beks, a swoop gang, by infiltrating rival swoop gang, The Black Vulkars, and competing against them in a swoop race in order to rescue Bastila.

"Swoop racing" is described as a dangerous, fast-paced competition between skilled pilots.

In Star Wars Film and Television74-Z Speeder Bike: The 74-Z speeder bike makes its first appearance in Return of the Jedi as Imperial scout troopers patrol the forest surrounding the shield generator on Endor; during the movie's speeder bike chase Luke Skywalker (Mark Hamill) and Leia Organa (Carrie Fisher) pilot a pair of speeders to chase down scout troopers who might reveal the Rebel Alliance's presence on Endor.

Background material on the bike explains how the 74-Z, built by the Aratech Repulsor Company, was originally used by the Republic during the Clone Wars before being adopted by the Empire.

The bike measures 3.3 m (
11 ft) long, can carry one or two passengers, and achieves a maximum speed of 500 km/h (310 mph).

In addition to a self-charging battery system, sensors and communication equipment, the 74-Z is armed with a Ax-20 blaster cannon, though being stripped of all excess weight the bike offers no protection for the rider.

Sith Speeder:
Darth Maul is seen using a speeder bike to chase down
Qui-Gon Jinn (Liam Neeson) and Anakin Skywalker (Jake Lloyd)
in The Phantom Menace, identified in Star Wars material as a Razalon FC-20 speeder bike.

It is described as being a popular model with assassins and other criminals because of its ability to perform sharp turns and a compactness that makes it harder to track, though the small size also requires it be more frequently recharged.

Darth Maul's bike, the Bloodfin, has been stripped of all weaponry and sensors to make his lighter and faster, achieving a top speed of 650 km/h (400 mph).

BARC Speeder:
The BARC speeder first appears in Revenge of the Sith as Jedi Stass Allie is turned upon by her clone trooper escorts when Emperor Palpatine (Ian McDiarmid) initiates Order 66.

Manufactured by the Aratech Repulsor Company, the speeder bike's name is explained as being derived from the specialist clone troopers (Biker Advanced Recon Commandos) who typically pilot these craft.

Armed with a pair of blaster cannons, the BARC speeder is 4.6 m
(15 ft) long and can reach a top speed of 520 km/h (320 mph).

It normally seats only one passenger but can be modified with mission-specific sidecars.

==
Cultural Impact ==
The speeder bike, specifically the 74-Z as seen in Return of the Jedi, has been ranked as one of the top vehicles of the Star Wars universe, described as the "ultimate superbike" and "cooler than Boba Fett."

The speeder bike scene in Return of the Jedi has also been described as one of the top ten most thrilling chase sequences in the Star Wars saga.
Many fans of the Star Wars series have also been inspired to build life-size "working" replicas.

In 2016, a group of fans used Jetovator water-propelled jet packs to create several 74-Z replicas to film a recreation of the speeder bike chase scene.
Vintage Works of Green Bay, Wisconsin built a replica 74-Z speeder bike in 2017 using a Zero electric motorcycle.

Also in 2017, a team from Lithium Cycles worked with YouTube prankster Jesse to build a pair of 74-Z bikes using their Super 73 electric street motorcycles which they showed off on the streets of New York City.

In order to give the appearance the vehicles "hovered", the team placed mirrors underneath the bikes to shroud the wheels.
Although lacking the anti-gravity technology ascribed to speeder bikes, real-life hoverbikes utilize different principles of levitation with the goal of achieving a similar effect.

Mark DeRoche of Aerofex said it was "a tribute to George Lucas' team" that their prototype hoverbike - a low-altitude tandem duct aerial vehicle - resembled Star Wars speeders.

The HoverSurf HoverBike has also been compared to Star Wars speeder bikes, though it achieves flight by the same methods as a traditional quadcopter.
Since their inception, speeder bikes have been included in several Star Wars product lines, including Lego models and Hasbro miniatures.

== See also ==
Hoverbike


==
Bibliography ==
Barr, Tricia; Bray, Adam; Horton, Cole; Horton (2017).
Star Wars: The Visual Encyclopedia.
United States: DK Publishing.
ISBN 978-1-4654-5962-6.

Barr, Patricia; Bray, Adam; Jones, Matt; Horton, Cole; Wallace, Daniel; Windham, Ryder (2019).
Ultimate Star Wars New Edition.
United States: DK Publishing.
ISBN 978-1-4654-7900-6.

Luceno, James; Reynolds, David West; Windham, Ryder; Fry, Jason; Hidalgo, Pablo (2018).
Star Wars: The Complete Visual Dictionary.
United States: DK Publishing.
ISBN 978-1-4654-7547-3.

Lund, Kristin; Beecroft, Simon; Dougherty, Kerrie; Luceno, James; Fry, Jason (2016).
Star Wars: Complete Locations.
United States: DK Publishing.
ISBN 978-1-4654-5272-6.

Walker, Landry Q. (2018).
Star Wars Encyclopedia of Starfighters and Other Vehicles.
United States: DK Publishing.
ISBN 9781465482716.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Speeder Bike in the StarWars.com Databank
Ezra's Speeder Bike in the StarWars.com Databank
Freeco Bike in the StarWars.com Databank
Kanan's Speeder Bike in the StarWars.com Databank
Lothal Speeder Bike in the StarWars.com Databank
Speeder bike on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Swoop on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Star Destroyers are capital ships in the fictional Star Wars universe.
Star Destroyers were produced by Kuat Drive Yards and serve as "the signature vessel of the fleet" for the Galactic Republic, Galactic Empire, the First Order, and the Sith Eternal in numerous published works including film, television, novels, comics, and video games.
A single Star Destroyer could project considerable influence over a solar system in the name of the Empire: each can be deployed individually as both a forward operating base and as mobile weapon systems platform responsible for safeguarding multiple planets, trade routes, and systems, and carried enough firepower to subdue an entire planetary system or annihilate a small rebel fleet.

Notable examples of Star Destroyers include the precursor Venator-class Star Destroyer (prequel trilogy), the ubiquitous Imperial-class Star Destroyer (original trilogy), and the recent Xyston-class Star Destroyer (sequel trilogy).
Numerous other classes of "Star Destroyers" share the basic triangular "dagger" hull
; the successful v-shaped designs are explained in Legends as reflecting the Empire's "Tarkin's Doctrine" military philosophy and originating from Sith ideological influence, and have been adapted by numerous factions for a wide variety of applications.

Numerous Star Destroyer models and toys have been released.
The iconic scene in Star Wars (1977) featuring the Imperial Star Destroyer's first appearance where it pursues a Corellian Corvette has been called a milestone in special effects history.

==
Concept and design ==
In draft scripts for the film that would become Star Wars, the term "Stardestroyer" refers to two-man fighters flown by what would become the Galactic Empire.
The film's second draft features four Star Destroyers chasing a single Rebel ship, but the tremendous costs incurred by Industrial Light & Magic (ILM) when production began helped lead Lucas to use a single "terrifyingly large" Star Destroyer instead of four.
ILM built a 91-centimeter (36 in) shooting model that was about half the size of the model for the Tantive IV the Star Destroyer was chasing.
Lucas asked ILM to build a larger Star Destroyer model to match the Tantive IV's scale, but ILM convinced him that the Dykstraflex camera invented for the film made this unnecessary.
Nevertheless, they added additional hull details to the Star Destroyer model.
The 13-second opening shot was the first special effects piece ILM completed, and its success was an essential test for the Dykstraflex.
ILM built a 259-centimeter (102 in)
Star Destroyer, equipped with internal lighting to provide a better sense of scale, for The Empire Strikes Back (1980).
During production, Lucas decided that every Star Wars film would open in space with a shot of a Star Destroyer.
The Empire Strikes Back also introduces the Executor class of "Super Star Destroyer", also referred to as a "Star Dreadnought" or "Star Dreadnaught".
The shooting model for the Super Star Destroyer Executor in The Empire Strikes Back (1980) and Return of the Jedi (1983) was 282 centimeters (111 in)
long.
The design of the Venator-class Star Destroyers appearing in Revenge of the Sith (2005) are meant to bridge the appearance of the Acclamator-class transports in Attack of the Clones (2002) and the Imperial class in the original trilogy.
The Imperial I-class Star Destroyers are white, as shown in A New Hope, Rogue One, and Solo.
The Imperial II-class Star Destroyers in The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi
are grey.
Popular Mechanics has pointed out that, despite being freed from the 2D battle constraints of a planetary battle, Star Wars does not go by a true 3D environment in space battles.

== Depiction ==


===
Venator Star Destroyer ===
The Venator-class Star Destroyer makes its first theatrical appearance in Revenge of the Sith during the opening Battle of Coruscant.

Within the Star Wars setting, these ships are regarded as the most powerful capital ships of the Republic Navy during the Clone Wars, serving double duty as battleships and starfighter carriers.

Manufactured by Kuat Drive Yards, the Venator-class measures 1,137 m (3,730 ft) long, with a wingspan of 548 m (1,798 ft) and height of 268 m
(879 ft).

However the massive ship requires only a crew of 7,400 to operate, a deliberate feature compensating for the fact that the Separatists can produce battle droids faster than the Republic can grow clone troopers.

Powerful ion engines and a Class 1 hyperdrive allows the Venator-class to chase down fleeing ships.
Although the command tower is protected, it is a target for gunners on confederacy ships.

For armament the Star Destroyer is equipped with 8 heavy turbolaser turrets, 2 medium dual turbolaser turrets, 52 point-defense laser cannons, 4 proton torpedo tubes and 6 tractor beam projectors.

As a true warship, the Venator-class can feed nearly its entire reactor output (which at maximum power annihilates 40,000 tons of fuel per second) into its heavy turbolasers to devastating effect.

As a carrier, the Star Destroyer can deploy over 420 starfighters, including ARC-170s, V-wings, Z-95 Headhunters and Jedi interceptors, along with 40 LAAT gunships and 20 AT-TEs.

These can be launched rapidly thanks to a .5 km (0.31 mi)-long dorsal flight deck with armored bow doors.

While strong deflector shielding is employed around the doors, they are slow to open or close, presenting a weakness in the vessel's design.
During the Clone Wars these Star Destroyers, referred to also as Republic attack cruisers and Jedi cruisers, play an important role combating Separatist fleets and providing supporting fire for ground forces.

Thanks to their superior firepower, the Venator-class has a strong advantage against Separatist warships, and a small flotilla of attack cruisers can easily blast through the deflector shields of a Trade Federation Battleship.

At the Battle of Coruscant, over a thousand attack cruisers are deployed to defend the planet, one of which (the Star Destroyer Guarlara)
delivers a devastating barrage to the Invisible Hand at point-blank range.
After the end of the Clone Wars and creation of the Galactic Empire, these Star Destroyers will continue to serve for decades in the Imperial Navy until eventually replaced with the Imperial-class Star Destroyer.

===
Imperial Star Destroyer ===
The iconic Imperial-class Star Destroyer first appears in the opening scene of Star Wars, where the Imperial Star Destroyer Devastator, with Darth Vader on board, chases the CR90 Corvette Tantive IV (carrying Princess Leia)
above Tatooine after have fled from Scarif.

Background literature describes Imperial-class Star Destroyers as the chief warship of the Imperial Navy and symbol of Imperial might.

These enormous capital ships are used to enforce the Emperor's will, bolster Imperial-backed governments, and act as mobile headquarters for senior Imperial commanders.

A single Star Destroyer is considered sufficient to overwhelm a rebellious planet, though major industrialized worlds may be assaulted by a fleet of six Star Destroyers with support cruisers and supply craft.

Deep-crust survival bunkers are regarded as a last refuge in the event of planetary bombardment by Imperial Star Destroyers.
Manufactured by Kuat Drive Yards, the Imperial I-class Star Destroyer is described as being 1,600 m (5,200 ft) long, propelled by massive Cygnus Spaceworks Gemnon-4 ion engines and a Class 2 hyperdrive, with a standard crew complement of 9,235 officers and 27,850 enlisted personnel.

Its most powerful armament are six heavy turbolaser turrets and two heavy ion cannon turrets positioned along either side of the upper deck structure.

These are supported by 60 Taim & Bak XX-9 heavy turbolaser batteries, 60 NK-7 ion cannons, and 10 Phylon Q7 tractor beam projectors.

For ground engagements, Star Destroyers carry 9,700 stormtroopers, 20 AT-ATs, 30 AT-STs or AT-DPs, and 15 Imperial Troop Transports.

In addition to a full wing of 72 TIE Fighters (typically 48 TIE fighters, 12 TIE bombers and 12 TIE boarding craft), Star Destroyers carry a range of auxiliary craft, including Lambda-class shuttles, Sentinel-class landing craft, and single-walker landing barges.
Darth Vader's Devastator is the last of the Imperial I-class ships to be built by Kuat Drive Yards before switching to the Imperial II-class, which take part in the Battle of Hoth.

Designated Death Squadron, this fleet of Star Destroyers is led by Darth Vader aboard the Executor, first in a new class of Super Star Destroyer.

Although the battle is won by Imperial forces, Vader orders his Star Destroyers to focus on capturing the Millennium Falcon rather than hunt down the escaping Rebel transports, allowing many to escape.

The Falcon manages to evade this pursuit by hiding in the sensor blind spot of the Star Destroyer Avenger.

At the Battle of Endor, Imperial Star Destroyers prove vulnerable to fleets of starfighters flown by skilled Rebel pilots, who exploit the ships' exposed bridges and deflector shield generators to cause damage.

A year after their defeat at Endor, the Empire makes a last stand at Jakku, with Star Destroyers using their tractor beams to drag New Republic ships down to the planet's surface where their wrecks form the Graveyard of Ships.

===
Super Star Destroyer ===
Within the Star Wars universe, the term "Super Star Destroyer" is a colloquialism used to refer to any ship larger than an Imperial Star Destroyer.

The largest and most powerful of these is the Executor, which first appeared in The Empire Strikes Back as the personal flagship of Darth Vader.

The first in a line of Executor-class Star Dreadnoughts, the ship is over 19,000 m (62,000 ft) in length, propelled by thirteen colossal engines and a Class 1 hyperdrive.

Its armament includes over 5,000 turbolasers, ion cannons and tractor beam projectors and it can carry more than 1,000 vessels.

The crew of the Executor numbers in the hundreds of thousands.

Its command tower, rising above the ship's technoscape on a thick stalk, is a standard model found on other Star Destroyers - including a pair of geodesic domes containing communication transceivers, sensors and deflector shield projectors - and allows for an unobstructed view of the battlefield.

At least twelve of these vessels were built by the Empire, including the Executor, Annihilator, Ravager and Arbitrator, but the exact number is unknown thanks to Imperial propaganda and black budgets.
From the bridge of the Executor, Darth Vader leads Death Squadron during the Battle of Hoth and afterwards in pursuit of the Millennium Falcon.

It later serves as the Imperial command ship during the Battle of Endor.

At Endor, intense bombardment by the Rebel Alliance fleet cause the ship's shields to fail, allowing Rebel starfighters to strafe the command tower.

During this attack an A-wing piloted by Arvel Crynyd crashes into the command bridge, destroying the main navigation complex and causing the vessel to lose control.

The Executor is lost when the Death Star II's gravity well pulls the ship into its surface, destroying the vessel instantly.

At Jakku where the Empire made its last stand, the Super Star Destroyer Ravager is one of the wrecks which make up the Graveyard of Ships.

===
Resurgent Star Destroyer ===
In The Force Awakens, set 30 years after the fall of the Empire, a new class of Star Destroyer is introduced in service to the First Order.

The Finalizer, the first of the Resurgent-class Star Destroyers built in secret by Kuat-Entralla Engineering, serves as the flagship for both Kylo Ren and General Hux.

Described in background literature as a clear violation of the treaties between the New Republic and the First Order, Resurgent-class Star Destroyers are 2,916 m (9,567 ft) in length with a crew of 19,000 officers and 55,000 enlisted personnel.

While evoking the traditional Imperial-class Star Destroyer, the Resurgent-class incorporates a number of fixes to the former's design flaws, including a less exposed command bridge and larger fighter complement.

The ship is armed with thousands of turbo lasers and ion cannons, sufficient firepower to slug it out with capital ships or reduce planetary surfaces to molten slag.

Additional point-defense laser turrets and missile launchers are used to attack more nimble opponents.

Two wings of TIE fighters can be quickly launched from dorsal flight decks and side hangars, and for planetary assaults the ship carries a full legion of over 8,000 Stormtroopers and over a hundred assault vehicles.

===
Mega Star Destroyer ===
The Mega-class Star Destroyer Supremacy made its first appearance in The Last Jedi.

Described as the only Mega-class Star Dreadnought in the galaxy, the Supremacy is 60,543 m
(198,632 ft) wide, 13,234 m
(43,419 ft) long and 3,975 m
(13,041 ft) high.

It has a crew of 2,225,000 personnel, a majority of whom are adolescents training to become officers and stormtroopers.

The Supremacy serves as the capital from which Supreme Leader Snoke commands the First Order.

Thousands of heavy turbolasers, antiship missile batteries, heavy ion cannons and tractor beam projectors give the ship firepower equivalent to an entire fleet.

The vessel also possesses an industrial capacity that would rival most planets, with asteroid mining complexes, foundries, production lines, research labs and training centers.

Six external and two internal stations allow Resurgent-class Star Destroyers to dock with the Supremacy.

===
Sith Star Destroyers ===
In The Rise of Skywalker, a reborn Emperor Palpatine unveils a new class of Star Destroyer as part of his Final Order.

Identified by in-universe sources as Xyston-class but referred to informally as Sith Star Destroyers, these ships resemble the older Imperial I-class Star Destroyers but are larger with a length of 2,406 m (7,894 ft) and height of 682 m (2,238 ft).

Built on Exegol by automated factories and with a total crew of 29,585 personnel, the distinguishing feature of these Sith Star Destroyers is an axial superlaser powerful enough to shatter a planet, made possible by a powerful reactor channeling the energy of a miniature sun through kyber crystals.

Other weaponry includes 40 heavy turbolaser batteries, 40 ion cannons, 40 point-defense laser cannons, 35 warhead launchers and 10 heavy tractor beam projectors, though the space for a hangar and other storage facilities is taken up by the superlaser.

==
Star Wars Legends ==
In April 2014, most of the licensed Star Wars novels, games, and comics produced since 1976 (and prior to 2014), were rebranded by Lucasfilm as Star Wars Legends; and therefore declared non-canon to the franchise.
Star Destroyers feature in numerous Legends publications, with a considerable amount of additional notable information.
According to West End Games' Star Wars: The Roleplaying Game sourcebooks and other texts, Imperial-class Star Destroyers are constructed by Kuat Drive Yards and hold a distinguished place in the Imperial Navy, symbolizing the Empire's military might with a peak number of more than 25,000 vessels.
Like the Venator and Victory-class ships that precede it, the Imperial-class is a multi-role capital ship combining the roles of a battleship, starfighter carrier, and troopship.
Notable for its massive size and overwhelming firepower compared to its fore-bearers; a single Imperial-class ship is capable of singlehandedly taking on a fleet of enemy vessels or "reducing the surface of a planet to a slag" (known as "Base Delta Zero"), and its mere presence is often enough to deter rebellion.
At 1,600 meters (5,200 ft) long, Imperial-class Star Destroyers are crewed by 9,235 Officers, 27,850 enlisted personnel, and 275 Gunners.
The Imperial I is armed with 60 turbolasers, 60 ion cannons, and 10 tractor beam projectors for space combat.
The standard complement is 72 TIE fighters (including 12 TIE Bombers and 12-24 TIE Interceptors), and a variety of support craft including shuttles and transports.
Unlike other comparable capital ships like the Mon Calamari MC80 Star Cruiser of the Rebel Alliance (later New Republic), an Imperial-class Star Destroyer carries a full array of ground forces (including 9700 stormtroopers, 20 AT-ATs and 30 AT-STs) with dropships for rapid deployment to planetary surfaces, plus a prefabricated base if a permanent planetary garrison is required.
Though the Imperial Navy also has smaller capital ships like Nebulon-B Escort Frigates and CR90 Corvettes (the films show these vessels being used exclusively by the Rebel Alliance), Imperial-class Star Destroyers are usually the default choice for frontline deployments.
At the Battle of Endor the Rebel Alliance captured two Imperial-class Star Destroyers and added them to the New Republic fleet; they serve alongside Mon Calamari Cruisers in General Han Solo's task force as told in the X-wing series of novels and Dark Empire comics.
Although the New Republic eventually upgrades its starfleet with newer ship types, the Imperial-class Star Destroyer remains in service well into the New Jedi Order era and fights during the Yuuzhan Vong War.
Described in A Guide to the Star Wars Universe (1984) as being 8 kilometers (
5.0 mi) long, Executor-class Super Star Destroyers were later described as being 19 kilometers (
12 mi) long.
In addition to Vader's command ship Executor, Star Wars novels introduce the prison ship Lusankya and stealth-armored  Knight Hammer as other in the class.
Kevin J. Anderson's novel Darksaber describes a Super Star Destroyer as being "worth twenty Imperial Star Destroyers".
The description "Star Destroyer" and "Super Star Destroyer" are applied to several other massive dagger/triangle-shaped warships in Star Wars, such as the Pellaeon-class Star Destroyer in the Legacy comic series (2006–2010), and the reborn Emperor Palpatine's flagships Eclipse and Eclipse II Super Star Destroyers in the Dark Empire series (1991–1995).
The Eclipse-class was perhaps the ultimate Super Star Destroyer or Star Dreadnought in the Expanded Universe, incorporating a Death Star-type superlaser but miniaturized and more advanced, and gravity well projectors to prevent enemies from jumping to hyperspace, and having strong enough shields/armor to be able to ram enemy vessels.
Curtis Saxton, in the unofficial Star Wars Technical Commentaries (he has since been the author of the official Star Wars: Attack of the Clones Incredible Cross-Sections and Star Wars: Revenge of the Sith Incredible Cross-Sections), has advocated using the term Imperator-class in lieu of Imperial-class.
Saxton argues that "Imperial Star Destroyer" is a somewhat generic term, as the vast majority of Star Destroyer types are operated by the Galactic Empire's Imperial Navy which technically means they are all "Imperial Star Destroyers", although the Imperator/Imperial-class Star Destroyers are by far the most common type.
Similarly the "Super Star Destroyer" moniker has been used for numerous unrelated vessels of varying sizes and classes, so fans have suggested labeling the class instead by the lead ship such as Executor-class and Eclipse-class, with some referred to them instead as a "Star Dreadnought" (sometimes spelled "Star Dreadnaught") to emphasize their massive size relative to Star Destroyers.
Author Jason Fry introduced the "Anaxes War College System" which specifically divide warships into different types depending on their size and power, which explain all the differently sized "Super Star Destroyers" appearing in the Expanded Universe (now Star Wars Legends), supplementing the contradictory classification systems used in Star Wars lore previously, becoming reference material in the Star Wars Sourcebooks by West End Games.

The Victory-class Star Destroyer first described in the early Star Wars novella, was initially designed as a direct predecessor to the Imperial-class during the development of A New Hope, which would make it a follow-up to the Venator-class seen in Revenge of the Sith.
The Victory appears very similar in appearance to the Imperial-class which succeeded it; albeit the Victory being considerably smaller in scale (900 meters in length versus 1600 meters), adds atmospheric maneuvering "wings" on the port and starboard sides (according to Star Wars:
The Roleplaying Game sourcebooks, the Victory I-class can enter a planetary atmosphere which is a unique attribute not found in the Victory II and Imperial-class Star Destroyers), and a shorter conning tower with different elements on the command bridge.
The Victory-class was developed from a prototype Star Destroyer model created by Colin Cantwell for A New Hope, with the final design being used for the basis of the Imperial-class.
Ending up the Victory-class Star Destroyer did not make it to the films and for a long time featured only in Star Wars Legends (see below).
It first appeared in the new Star Wars canon in the 2014 novel Tarkin, written by James Luceno, and was first depicted in Darth Vader 6: Vader, Part VI, a 2015 comic book written by Kieron Gillen and illustrated by Salvador Larroca.
The Victory Star Destroyer is the Imperial Navy's starting vessel in the core set of Fantasy Flight Games's Star Wars: Armada, a table top miniatures game released on March 27, 2015.

==
Merchandise ==
Lego has released numerous Star Destroyer kits, including a 110-centimetre (43 in) 4,784-piece Imperial-class Star Destroyer and a 125-centimetre (49 in)
3,152-piece model of the Executor.
The Super Star Destroyer has also been merchandised.
Kenner wanted to use a less ominous name than Executor for the toy playset of Darth Vader's meditation chamber.
An advertisement agency's list of 153 alternatives included Starbase Malevolent, Black Coven, Haphaestus VII, and Cosmocurse; ultimately, the toy was labeled "Darth Vader's Star Destroyer".
In 2006, Wizards of the Coast created an Executor miniature as part of its Star Wars Miniatures Starship Battles game.
An electronic Super Star Destroyer toy released by Hasbro "is the rarest among Hasbro's Collector Fleet".

== See also ==
List of Star Wars spacecraft
List of Star Wars starfighters


==
Notes ==


==
Bibliography ==


==
References ==


===
Sources ===


==
External links ==
Imperial Star Destroyer in the StarWars.com Databank
Super Star Destroyer in the StarWars.com Databank
Executor in the StarWars.com Databank
Finalizer in the StarWars.com Databank
Star Destroyer on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Super Star Destroyer on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Venator Star Destroyer on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Category:
Star Destroyers on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
The following is a list of science-fictional Star Wars starfighters.

Within the Star Wars setting, a starfighter is defined as a "small, fast, manevuerable, and heavily armed starship used in direct confrontations between oppsing forces."

In addition to appearing in the saga's movies and TV series, several LucasArts games depict the player as a starfighter pilot.

In the Star Wars universe, starfighters are equipped with the same fictional technology found on other starships.

Sublight drives propel starfighters at below lightspeed velocities, with the most common type being the ion engine.

These engines are used to lift off from planetary surfaces, travel in deep space and engage other starships in space battles, while inertial dampeners protect the occupants from forceful accelerations.

Repulsorlifts are carried as secondary drives for atmospheric flight and when docking or making planetary landings.

Some starfighters are also equipped with an internal hyperdrive or connect to an external hyperdrive unit for faster-than-light travel.

The primary weapon on most starfighters are laser cannons, with additional weapons like proton torpedoes boasting additional firepower.

Some starfighters are also equipped with deflector shields which can be adjusted to protect specific areas of the ship.

== Starfighters appearing in the Original Trilogy ==


===
A-wing ===
The Kuat RZ-1 A-wing Interceptor is a class of starfighter, depicted as fast but fragile interceptors of the Rebel Alliance, conceived for high-speed surgical strikes, deep reconnaissance and escort fighter duty.
A-wings first appear in Return of the Jedi (1983) during the climactic Battle of Endor.

It gained popularity through its depiction in several video games, such as Battlefront II and 2015 Battlefront, and has been merchandised by several companies.

=== B-wing ===
The A/SF-01 B-wing starfighter is a fictional Rebel Alliance and New Republic starfighter.
They first appear in Return of the Jedi (1983) and subsequently in the Star Wars expanded universe's books, comics, and games.
A variety of B-wing merchandise has been released by toy companies.

Origin and designAlthough initial plans called for B-wings to appear in several scenes, its narrow appearance from some angles made it difficult to see against the backdrop of space.
The ship's rotating cockpit stems from an initial design for the Millennium Falcon.

DepictionThe B-wing's canonical origin (as the Blade Wing), as-designed by the Mon Calamari engineer Quarrie, is depicted in the Star Wars Rebels, second season episode "Wings of the Master".

Quarrie designed the Blade Wing to be a blockade buster for the Rebel Alliance, combining aspects of previous ships built by the Verpine Slayne & Korpil corporation including the V-19 Torrent starfighter, H-60 Tempest bomber and T-6 shuttle.

While Quarrie's Blade Wing helped the crew of the Ghost escape an Imperial blockade, the prototype was plagued with a number of technical challenges.

Senator Bail Organa was responsible for convincing Slayne & Korpil to work with Quarrie to fix these issues and create a production model, the A/SF-01, for the Rebel Alliance.
Expanded universe material states the A/SF-01 was the most well-armed starfighter in the Star Wars galaxy at the time it was introduced; a single B-wing was capable of attacking and destroying enemy capital ships.

However it was also slower and less maneuverable than any other Rebel starfighter and required the most maintenance.

The B-wing's gyrostabilized cockpit allowed the pilot to maintain a consistent horizon while the craft's body rotated around it, minimizing g-stresses on the pilot and letting them concentrate on flying and targeting.

However, if the gyro-stabilization system was not kept in prime condition, it could fail under the tremendous pressure and lock up.

The B-wing featured S-foils similar in function to those of the X-wing fighter.

MerchandiseBoth Kenner and Hasbro released B-wing toys, the B-wing is part of two Micro Machines three-packs, and Lego has made several B-wing sets.
A Micro Machines Alpha Fleet package includes models both of the B-wing's film appearance and of an initial production design.
Decipher and Wizards of the Coast published B-wing cards for the Star Wars Customizable Card Game and Star Wars Trading Card Game, respectively.
The second expansion pack for the X-Wing flight simulator, B-Wing, introduces the B-wing as a playable starfighter; several other LucasArts products also depict B-wings.

===
TIE fighter (and variants) ===
TIE fighters—and variants such as TIE interceptors and TIE bombers—appear throughout the original trilogy.
They are usually not equipped with shields or a hyperdrive, which makes them mass-producible and allows for considerable weapon payloads, or alternatively, for high speed and agility.
The pilot has to wear a pressurized suit, as TIE fighters also lack life support systems.

=== X-wing ===
The X-wing starfighter, named for the distinctive shape made when its S-Foils are in attack position, was a class of starfighter used by the Rebel Alliance in their conflict with the Galactic Empire.

It made its theatrical debut, as the T-65B model, in Star Wars (1977) as the spacecraft piloted by Luke Skywalker and the Red Squadron when Luke destroyed the Death Star.

The starfighter featured extensively in the Star Wars original trilogy and in the Expanded Universe that followed, and has been merchandised as a variety of toys and models.

=== Y-wing ===
The Y-wing assault starfighter/bomber are depicted as the primary fighter-bombers of the Galactic Republic, Rebel Alliance, New Republic, and the Resistance; being ideally suited for anti-shipping, close air support, and ground attack missions.

They made their theatrical appearance in Star Wars Episode IV:
A New Hope (1977) and have featured in movies, television shows, and
the Star Wars expanded universe's books, comics, and games.

== Starfighters appearing in the Prequel Trilogy ==


=== ARC-170 ===
The ARC-170 starfighter or Aggressive ReConnaissance-170 starfighter were flown by clone pilots of the Galactic Republic during the Clone Wars.
They first appear in the opening battle sequence of Star Wars:
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith (2005)
and have featured in the 2008 Clone Wars television series.
The fighter's name stems from "ART 170", the file name of the art that established the ship's appearance; during scripting it was simply referred to as the "Clone Fighter.
"According
to background material, the ARC-170 is a rugged and versatile starfighter that can fulfill a variety of roles.

A joint venture between the Incom and Subpro corporations, the ARC-170 measures 14.5 m (48 ft)
long, with a wingspan of 22.6 m (74 ft) and height of 4.78 m (15.7 ft).

Its crew includes a pilot, a co-pilot/forward gunner, a tail gunner, and an astromech droid to act as navigator and make repairs.

With its hyperdrive and five day's worth of supplies, the ARC-170 can operate deep behind enemy lines, where the variety of scanners and sensor jammers in its heavy nose help it conduct dangerous scouting missions.

Its weaponry includes a pair of forward-facing medium laser cannons, mated with targeting rangefinders, which are powerful enough to punch through capital ship armor plating; two aft-facing laser cannons for staving off pursuing starfighters; and six proton torpedoes which allow it to conduct bombing missions.

Deflector shielding protects the fighter from enemy attack and allows it to achieve hypersonic speed in an atmosphere by dispersing the heat created from air friction.
After the end of the Clone Wars, the ARC-170 would continue to serve under the Galactic Empire until replaced in favor of the TIE Fighter.

It would also serve as the in-universe inspiration for Incom's next starfighter, the X-wing.

Like the X-wing, the ARC-170 features S-foils, which open during combat to shed waste heat, enlarge the starfighter's deflector shields, and function as stabilizer surfaces during atmospheric flight.
===
Droid Tri-Fighter ===
Droid Tri-fighters are droid starfighters used by Separatist forces during the Clone Wars.

They made their first theatrical appearance in the opening battle of Revenge of the Sith (2005).
Original plans to equip the fighters with boosters were abandoned when Lucas decided they were an unnecessary distraction in the already chaotic scene.

Its curved braces are deliberately reminiscent of the Trade Federation's circular battleship.
The tri-fighter is a compact and heavily armed starfighter with three arms surrounding a rotating gyroscopic core.

Measuring 5.4 m (18 ft) long, with a 1.96 m (6 ft 5 in) wingspan and 3.45 m (11.3 ft) width, it's in-universe manufacturer are the Colicoids, the same species which produced Droideka.

They are more dangerous than Vulture droids thanks to an advanced heuristic droid brain which better learns from enemy tactics and can be linked to coordinate multi-fighter attacks.

While not as fast as a Jedi interceptor, the tri-fighter has three independent thrusters to give it impressive agility.

Four laser cannons, one light cannon on each arm and one nose-mounted medium cannon, can fire together or independently.

It can also carry between two and six missiles, including proton torpedoes, concussion missiles and buzz droids.

===
Geonosian starfighter ===
Geonosian Starfighters appear in the climactic Battle of Geonosis in Star Wars:
Episode II – Attack of the Clones when they chase after a Republic attack gunship carrying Anakin Skywalker (Hayden Christensen), Obi-Wan Kenobi (Ewan McGregor) and Padmé Amidala (Natalie Portman).

The craft was also set to appear in an air battle during which Republic attack gunships attack a Geonosian airstrip but the scenes were ultimately cut.

The starfighter technically made its first appearance in the video game
Star Wars: Jedi Starfighter which was released prior to the movie.
Within the Star Wars universe these craft were considered nimble fighters, working equally well in space or in an atmosphere, and afforded the pilot a 360° field of view.

Formally known as the Nantex-class starfighter and produced by the Huppla Pasa Tisc Shipwrights Collective, the Geonosian fighter is 9.8 m (32 ft) long, 1.9 m (6 ft 3 in) wide and 2.2 m (7 ft 3 in) tall (excluding the cockpit bubble).

In addition to a magnetically-suspended laser cannon turret, the fighter is equipped with 100 independently aiming narrow-beam tractor/repulsor projectors.

These projectors are used not only to grapple with other spacrcraft but to help maneuver the fighter by pulling or pushing against surrounding objects.

While these fighters are said to possess tremendous acceleration and maneuverability thanks to a unique engine mount (also magnetically suspended), few of these fighters are exported as they are designed specifically around Geonosian senses and dexterity to operate.

===
Jedi starfighter ===
The Delta-7 Aethersprite-class light interceptors (better known as "Jedi starfighters") appear in Star Wars Episode II:
Attack of the Clones (2002), when Obi-Wan Kenobi (Ewan McGregor) travels via Jedi starfighter to Kamino to investigate the attempted assassination of Padmé Amidala (Natalie Portman); he also flies a Jedi starfighter to Geonosis in an attempt to track down the bounty hunter Jango Fett (Temuera Morrison).

Later, Plo Koon (Matt Sloan) flies a Jedi starfighter when he is shot down by clone troopers carrying out Emperor Palpatine's (Ian McDiarmid) Order 66 in Revenge of the Sith (2005).

In the 2003 Clone Wars animated series, Anakin Skywalker is seen flying a customized Delta-7, called the Azure Angel, of which a Lego model was later made.
The Jedi starfighter's triangular shape stems from the shape of Imperial Star Destroyers in the original Star Wars trilogy.
Industrial Light & Magic designer Doug Chiang identified the Jedi starfighter as one of the first designs that bridges the aesthetic between the prequel and original trilogies.
Chiang noted that viewers' familiarity with the Star Destroyer's appearance and Imperial affiliation gives added symbolism to the Jedi craft's appearance and foreshadows the Empire's rise to power.

A full-scale model of the starfighter was also created for filming purposes.

During scenes taking place on the rain-swept landing pads of Kamino, the model had to be painted and specially prepared in order to resist any water damage.
Star Wars expanded universe material states that the Delta-7 was designed specifically with the Jedi's Force-aided reflexes in mind by stripping them down and making their controls as responsive as possible.

Manufactured for the Jedi by Kuat Systems Engineering, the starfighter measures just 8 m (26 ft) long, 3.92 m (12.9 ft)
wide and 1.44 m
(4 ft 9 in) high, making it difficult to detect.

An astromech droid fits in an off-center socket on the port side of the Delta-7, but the tiny fighter's size requires the droid's body be modified in order to fit (later Delta-7B models place the socket in front of the cockpit to allow full-sized astromech units).

A pair of laser cannons and deflector shielding allows the Jedi pilot to engage in combat, though ideally as a last resort.

Lacking an internal hyperdrive, the Jedi starfighter uses an external hyperspace transport wing to which it can attach for faster-than-light travel.
Its two Novaldex J-44 "Jetforce" sublight engines are equipped with electromagnetic thrust nozzles that focus and time engine bursts to match the Jedi's abilities.

This also makes the starfighter overwhelmingly difficult for a non-Jedi to pilot.

When the Jedi were destroyed after Order 66, Kuat Systems Engineering designed a new starfighter that would be more manageable for non-Jedi pilots: the A-wing.
===
Jedi interceptor ===
The Eta-2 Actis-class light interceptors, also known as "Jedi interceptors", made their first theatrical in Star Wars Episode III: Revenge of the Sith (2005).

In the opening space battle, Obi-Wan Kenobi (Ewan McGregor) and Anakin Skywalker (Hayden Christensen) pilot Jedi interceptors on a mission to rescue Chancellor Palpatine (Ian McDiarmid) from General Grievous.

The craft's design was purposefully meant to echo the earlier Jedi starfighter and the TIE Fighter, while its opening wing panels were influenced by a feature on Hasbro's toy model of the Jedi starfighter.

For filming close-ups of the actors, a single full-scale model of the Jedi interceptor was created.

Since Obi-Wan and Anakin's interceptors were individualized with their own color schemes, each actor would perform their scenes separately and switch out, allowing the model to be redressed in between.
In-universe material states that this new starfighter was meant to expand the Jedi's arsenal as they found themselves on the front lines of the Clone Wars, being smaller but possessing greater firepower than the earlier Delta-7 with twin laser cannons and twin ion cannons.

Also built by Kuat Systems Engineering, the Eta-2 is even smaller than the Delta-7 at just 5.47 m
(17.9 ft) long, 4.3 m (14 ft) wide and 2.5 m
(8 ft 2 in) high with wings deployed, though with enough space for an astromech droid socket inside the port wing.

It is also even more maneuverable with two ion engines that can deflect thrust up to 30 degrees.

The Eta-2 has no deflector shields or bulky flight controls in order to save weight and maximize speed and agility, instead relying on the Jedi's Force abilities to compensate.

In order to manage heat levels, the interceptor is fitted with S-foils on the tip of each wing which open to reveal radiator panels.

After the Jedi were destroyed during Order 66, the Eta-2 would serve as the inspiration for the Galactic Empire's TIE Fighter.

===
Naboo N-1 starfighter ===
The Naboo N-1 Starfighter made its theatrical appearance in Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace.

During the climactic Battle of Naboo, a squadron of the fighters attacked the orbiting Trade Federation Droid Control Ship Saak'ak.
Anakin Skywalker (Jake Lloyd) accidentally steals a Naboo N-1 starfighter and pilots it into the Droid Control Ship's docking bay, destroying the vessel from the inside.

N-1 Starfighters also appear in the beginning of Star Wars:
Episode II – Attack of the Clones escorting senator Padmé Amidala's (Natalie Portman)
Naboo Royal Cruiser upon its arrival to Coruscant.

The N-1 also appears at the end of the edited and remastered 2004 "Special Edition" DVD version of Return of the Jedi.

The fighter technically first appeared as an unlockable vehicle in Star Wars:
Rogue Squadron, which was released approximately six months before The Phantom Menace, and was available as a playable vehicle in the video games
Star Wars: Battle for Naboo and Star Wars: Starfighter.

The N-1 initially had the same angular design as craft in the original Star Wars trilogy; only in later designs did it take on a streamlined appearance.
A life-size model of a Naboo Starfighter hangs suspended from the ceiling of the Blue Wing at the Boston Museum of Science, in Boston, Massachusetts.
This 1:1 scale model was unveiled at the museum in April 2004, as a prelude to the Star Wars: Where Science Meets Imagination exhibit.
The model was previously used as a prop during the filming of The Phantom Menace.
Based on in-universe background material, the N-1's sleek design exemplifies the philosophy of art and function in Naboo technology.

At 11 m (36 ft) long, the starfighters are built by the Theed Palace Space Vessel Engineering Corps using a number of standard components in a custom-built spaceframe.

The chromium finish on the starfighter's forward surfaces indicate it's royal status as an escort for Naboo's Queen.

The "rat-tail" finial of the main body serves dual roles as a high-voltage charge collector and receiver of encrypted information when the fighter is plugged in at the palace hanger, while the secondary finials contain engine heat sinks.

Behind the pilot's cockpit, an astromech droid plugs in to perform in-flight navigation and maintenance, although the fighter is also equipped with a capable automatic pilot feature.

Armament includes twin laser cannons and twin proton torpedo launchers with a capacity for 10 torpedoes.
In a 2018 a test was conducted using the Autodesk Flow Design virtual wind tunnel program to look at the aerodynamic properties of several Star Wars starfighter models.

Of those models which were tested, the N-1 was found to be the most aerodynamic of all with a drag coefficient of .1, which while somewhat poor compared to the real-life .02 rating of the F-4E Phantom was significantly better than all other starfighters tested.

===
Porax-38 starfighter ===
The Porax-38 appears in Revenge of the Sith as a starfighter piloted by the native Utapauns during the Battle of Utapau.
Although featured in a full two-page spread in the Revenge of the Sith Incredible Cross-Sections book, the fighter's role was significantly reduced in the final film.

This was due to the fact that the P-38's digital model, being a late addition to the film, was not completed to the level originally planned, and so was relegated to a background craft.

===
Soulless One ===
The Soulless One was General Grievous' personal starfighter, a customized version of a Belbullab-22 starfighter, which made its first theatrical appearance in Revenge of the Sith (2005).

After Obi-Wan Kenobi (Ewan McGregor) defeated General Grievous on Utapau, he used Grievous' starfighter to escape from his clone troopers attempting to carry out Order 66 and rendezvoused with Yoda and Senator Bail Organa (Jimmy Smits).
=== V-wing ===
The V-wing Fighter or Alpha-3 Nimbus-class V-Wing made its theatrical appearance in the Revenge of the Sith (2005), as the Galactic Republic is formally transformed into the Galactic Empire.

Originally, animation director Rob Coleman proposed that TIE Fighters be featured to signify this transition, but George Lucas pointed out that (in the film's chronology) there were nineteen years between the events of Revenge of the Sith and the original Star Wars.

Allowing additional time for the TIE fighter to be introduced, a new starfighter was created instead, purposefully similar in both design and sound to the TIE fighter while also resembling the Jedi's Delta-7 starfighter.
According to Star Wars canon, the V-wing's design combines elements of the ARC-170, V-19 and Delta-7, making it an ideal escort fighter.

Introduced by Kuat Systems Engineering during the final days of the Clone Wars, the compact V-wing is just 7.9 m (26 ft)
long and 3.8 m (12 ft) wide, with its height expanding to 5.84 m (19.2 ft) when the wings are deployed.

An astromech droid assists the pilot with in-flight navigation and maintenance.

Two pairs of laser cannons on swivel mounts in the wing struts provide a rapid-fire offensive punch.

The V-wing is far more maneuverable than the ARC-170, making it perfect for combating swarms of Tri-fighters and Vulture droids, while a pair of powerful ion engines can propel the fighter to a top atmospheric speed of 52,000 km/h (32,000 mph).

In order to save on weight to make the fighter so fast and maneuverable, it does not feature a hyperdrive or pressurized cockpit.

Additionally, folding wings on either side of the hull contain radiator panels to manage heat levels during intense activity.

===
Vulture Droid ===
The Vulture Droid or Variable Geometry Self-Propelled Battle Droid is a droid starfighter that made its theatrical appearance in The Phantom Menace (1999) as part of the Trade Federation's space fleet and appeared again, slightly different, in Revenge of the Sith (2005), as a Separatist space unit (likely coming from the Trade Federation, which sells its droid forces to the CIS, as established in Attack of the Clones).
Original designs depicted the droid starfighter not as a droid itself, but instead piloted by a battle droid.

In order to demonstrate that it was both a robotic being as well as vehicle, it was decide to give the vulture droid a transformative element, allowing its wings to fold down and serve as legs.

Two 18" maquettes of the vulture droid were built - one in ship mode and one in walking mode - to help create the digital model.

In order to represent the idea of three vulture droids sharing one "brain," animators purposefully linked the motion of each three-ship flight when creating the climactic battle of The Phantom Menace.
As per Star Wars sources, vulture droids were originally produced by the Xi Char cathedral factories of Hoar Chall Engineering for the Trade Federation before later becoming a mainstay of Separatist fighter squadrons during the Clone Wars.

At 3.5 m (11 ft) long when in flight mode, these droid starfighters are designed to engage the enemy in overwhelming swarms, partially to overcome their lack of cunning and resourcefulness.

Electromagnetic thrust-vectoring makes vulture droids elusive targets to hit, powered by concentrated solid fuel slugs which provide tremendous power but with the drawback of limited range.

For armament the droid carries a pair of twin blaster cannons in the wings while two energy torpedo launchers are mounted in the main body; when the wings retract they conceal the blasters and protect them from microparticle and atmospheric corrosion.

When necessary, the droid can uses its repulsorlifts to land and transform into a four-legged walking configuration to occupy territory, angling its energy torpedo launchers for antipersonnel use.
Originally, vulture droids were controlled by a central command ship, but were later given a limited degree of independence.
A variant of the vulture droid is the Hyena Bomber Droid, with a larger, sturdier hull and larger wings.
It also has a second hull with downward-facing photoreceptors for precision bomb dropping.
The Hyena Bomber Droid made its first appearance in the 2008 Clone Wars television series.

== Starfighters appearing in other Star Wars media ==


=== E-wing ===
An improved successor to the X-wing, the E-wing first appeared in Dark Horse Comics' Dark Empire series.
They are one of few Expanded Universe vehicles to be a part of Micro Machines' Action Fleet line.
Armed with three Taim & Bak IX9 Medium Laser Cannons and two proton torpedo launchers, the E-wing's aerodynamic frame made the fighter highly maneuverable and exceptional in atmospheric flight.
Its Class 1 Hyperdrive allowed for extended reconnaissance missions and rapid strategic redeployment.
As part of a larger force, the E-wing filled a versatile mid-range multirole combat aircraft or light torpedo bomber.

===
Gauntlet Fighter ===
A Gauntlet Fighter, or Kom'rk-class fighter, is a Mandalorian class of ship.
Larger than most starfighters, it can carry a larger crew and accommodate passengers.
They were introduced in Star Wars:
The Clone Wars being used by the Mandalorian splinter group Deathwatch.

Another one known as the Nightbrother later served as Darth Maul's personal craft in Star Wars Rebels.

Kom'rk-class fighter/transports are equipped with four laser cannons, a Class 1 hyperdrive, and space to carry up to 24 soldiers.

Two versions of the starfighter model exist,
one 68 m (223 ft) long and a smaller variant 52.3 m
(172 ft) long.

===
Fanblade starfighter ===
Asajj Ventress flies the fanblade in the animated Star Wars: Clone Wars series.
Just as Ventress' appearance was inspired by a Samurai stance, the ship itself has Asian influences: its design is based on a sensu folding fan.

Background literature refers to these as Ginivex-class fanblade starfighters, with only six built for Asajj's personal use.

13.1 m (43 ft)
long, the starfighters' retractable solar sail helps make the ship extremely fast with a powerful deflector shield but also makes it easier to spot.

It is also equipped with a Class 1 hyperdrive and a rotating laser cannon mounted on either end of the solar sail.

=== U-wing ===
The UT-60D U-wing starfighter/support craft is a Rebel troop transport/gunship model manufactured by Incom Corporation for the purpose of supporting special operations forces insertion and extraction into denied areas from strategic distances.
Used to penetrate enemy zones to drop off Rebel infantry, provide close air support, and extract them upon mission completion.
U-wings first appeared in the movie Rogue One, where they were pivotal in the transport and protection of the Rebel Alliance's ground forces during the Battle of Scarif.

Origin and designDirector Gareth Edwards wanted Rogue One to be grounded in the aesthetics of the Korean or Vietnam War in order to contrast it with the more World War II look of the original Star Wars film.

Thus when it came time to design a unique ship for the film's heroes to travel around in, he wanted it to be akin to a "Huey" version of the X-wing.

While experimenting with different models and names ("Z-wing, R-wing, Q-wing, etc."),
the final design picked was in part because it looked like an inverted X-wing.

For filming interior scenes, a full-size U-wing cockpit was built and mounted on a manually controlled gimbal in front of a wall of LED panels.

The panels were used instead of traditional film lights so that more natural lighting could be simulated.

DepictionIn-universe material states that the UT-60 was the last starfighter design created by Incom Corporation before the company was nationalized by the Galactic Empire.

Originally intended as a transport ship for couriers and planetary defense forces, the last of the UT-60D starfighters to be built were secured for the Rebel Alliance thanks to the efforts of Senator Bail Organa (Jimmy Smits).

Rebel mechanics and technicians transformed their U-wings into sturdy gunships and troop transports for Rebel Alliance Special Forces (SpecForces) making dangerous insertions into Imperial territory.

The U-wing's engine configuration was inspired in part by the X-wing, and like the X-wing featured S-foils but in a variable-sweep wing format, opening them to improve atmospheric maneuverability and enlarge its deflector shield.

However the ship was not designed for the tight turns necessary for dogfights, and while the U-wing did feature a hyperdrive for faster-than-light travel, extended operations with a full passenger compliment would quickly deplete the vessel's life support systems.

The U-wing's two laser cannons could be supplemented by a pair of infantry heavy weapons handled by dedicated door gunners.

=== V-19 Torrent ===
The V-19 Torrent starfighter first appeared in the 2003 Clone Wars animated series and have appeared in other media related to the Clone Wars.

Background material states the V-19 had impressive speed and maneuverability, making it a tricky starfighter to fly.

It had three S-foils that functioned like those on the X-wing and was equipped with two laser cannons and twin concussion missile launchers.

At the beginning of the Clone Wars, V-19 starfighters did not have hyperdrives for faster-than-light travel, instead relying on external hyperspace transport rings to which they would attached.

Later models were modified to be equipped with an internal hyperdrive.

=== Z-95 Headhunter ===
The Z-95 Headhunter is a class of starfighter which was first described in the Brian Daley's 1979 novel Han Solo at Stars' End as having swing-wings and a bubble cockpit.
In the 1980–81 comic strip adaptation, they are depicted like triangular, twin-tailed airplanes.
The 1988 Tatooine Manhunt adventure book for Star Wars:
The Roleplaying Game depicts the Z-95 as a precursor to the X-wing, but with only two wings, based on an early Joe Johnston production sketch.
The Z-95 is featured variously in the Expanded Universe, including the Star Wars: X-wing Rogue Squadron comic series, as well as in 2008's The Clone Wars television series, in which it is used by the Galactic Republic.

The Z-95 Headhunter is described in the Star Wars Databank as "the forerunner of the ... X-wing", a versatile snub-fighter despite being outdated at the time of the Clone Wars.

Incom Corporation originally designed the Z-95 for planetary defense forces, and while lacking many features like a hyperdrive or astromech droid it was appreciated for its armaments and internal environmental controls.
The Republic commissioned upgraded models of the Z-95 for their clone pilots which featured more powerful weaponry and deflector shields, as well as superior endurance and adaptability.
At the beginning of the one-shot comic Age of Resistance: Rose Tico, a young Paige and Rose Tico find out who is a better pilot of the Z-95.
==
See also ==
List of Star Wars spacecraft
Star Wars planetary vehicles
Weapons in science fiction


==
Bibliography ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Index of Starship section of the Star Wars Encyclopedia - Includes several starfighters
Category:Starfighters on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Intricate Illustrations of Star Wars Spacecraft Cutouts Reveal Their Inner Mechanics by Leah Pellegrini April 23, 2016
The Koensayr BTL Y-wing assault starfighter/bomber is a fictional spacecraft from the Star Wars franchise.
They are depicted as the primary fighter-bombers of the Galactic Republic, Rebel Alliance, New Republic, and the Resistance; being ideally suited for anti-shipping, close air support, and ground attack missions.

They made their theatrical appearance in Star Wars Episode IV:
A New Hope and have featured in movies, television shows, and
the Star Wars expanded universe's books, comics, and games.

==
Origin and design ==
Industrial Light & Magic's Colin Cantwell, who also designed the saga's TIE fighters, initially designed the Y-wing with a large bubble turret for a gunner.
However, the dome did not appear properly when filmed against bluescreen and subsequent designs omitted the turret.

== Appearances ==
In the original Star Wars movie (1977), a group of Y-wings designated "Gold Squadron" took part in the attack on the Death Star.

Led by squadron leader Jon Vander (Angus MacInnes)
, Y-wings made the first unsuccessful "trench run" on the Death Star's exhaust port, and only one Y-wing would survive the battle itself.

Y-wings made a brief appearance at the end of The Empire Strikes Back (1980) when the heroes are reunited with the Rebel fleet, and feature alongside other Rebel starfighters during the climatic space battle of Return of the Jedi (1983).

Y-wings were later seen in The Clone Wars 2008 television series.

Here they are depicted as fighter-bombers used by the Galactic Republic in the Clone Wars against the Separatists.
General Anakin Skywalker is shown leading a squadron of Y-wings on one of their first missions to take out a Separatist cruiser, where they are noted for their powerful shields and secondary gunner.

In the Star Wars Rebels 2014 animated series, the crew of the Ghost are shown stealing Old Republic Y-wings, in the process of being dismantled by the Galactic Empire, for use by the nascent Rebel Alliance.

Y-wings made their theatrical reappearance in Rogue One (2016), an anthology film set immediately prior to the events of the original Star Wars film.

Here the Y-wings of Gold Squadron are shown playing a pivotal role during the Battle of Scarif in disabling an Imperial Star Destroyer with ion torpedoes.

Y-wings would appear again during the climax of Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker (2019).

== Depiction ==
Based on Star Wars background material, the Galactic Republic commissioned Koensayr Manufacturing to produce the BTL-B Y-wing during the early part of the Clone Wars.

Prized for its durability and long-range striking capability, the success of the Y-wing prompted further production of the original model and a number of variants.

However when the war concluded and the Galactic Empire came to power, Y-wings were decommissioned and relegated to military surplus sellers or scrapyards.

The Rebel Alliance sought to buy or commandeer as many Y-wings as possible and they became the most readily available starfighters to the Rebellion during the Galactic Civil War.

Rebel Y-wings were used to perform a variety of missions including courier, escort and reconnaissance.
The original BTL-B Y-wing features a forward module seating a pilot in the cockpit and a gunner in a bubble turret.

An astromech droid (which served as the fighter's navigation system) fits into a dedicated socket behind them.

The module contains the starfighter's armaments: two forward-firing laser cannons, twin ion cannons in the turret, and a pair of torpedo launchers with six-round magazines capable of launching bombs, cluster missiles and other ordnance.

The module connects to two powerful ion engines via reinforced central spar and cross wing, all encased in heavy armor plating.

Variants include the BTL-S3, which replaces the bubble turret with a remote-controlled turret and seats the gunner behind the pilot in the cockpit, and the BTL-A4, which removes the gunner altogether and gives the pilot control of the ion cannons.
Once acquired, Rebel technicians modified the fighter-bombers to make them more suitable to the Rebellion's hit-and-run tactics.

Armor plating was removed to save on weight and make it easier to perform maintenance, compensated for by increasing deflector shield power.

Various other components were removed or rearranged - such as replacing the six-round torpedo magazines with four-round versions - to lighten weight and increase performance while maintaining overall integrity.

The resulting modification makes these Rebel Y-wings faster and more lethal than the original version.
After the defeat of the Empire, Koensayr introduced a new version of the Y-wing to capitalize on the fighter's popularity.

This BTA-NR2 model emulates the look of the Rebel-modified Y-wings both because the public is more familiar with this version and because it allows for greater customization.

While outwardly mimicking the "classic" Y-wing design, the new version features various upgrades including stronger shields and more sophisticated sensors.

==
Cultural impact ==
In 2018, a number of Star Wars starfighters had their aerodynamic abilities tested using the Autodesk Flow Design virtual wind tunnel program.

Of those tested, the Y-wing had a drag coefficient of .68 which, while worse than the real-life example of the F-4E Phantom with a rating of .02, was better than that of most TIE Fighters tested.

These poor results were rationalized with the in-universe explanations that drag coefficient plays no role in space travel, and that Star Wars fighters can use repulsorlifts and deflector shields to give themselves better flight profiles.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Y-wing starfighter in the StarWars.com Databank
BTL Y-wing starfighter on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
The following is a list of science-fictional Star Wars starfighters.

Within the Star Wars setting, a starfighter is defined as a "small, fast, manevuerable, and heavily armed starship used in direct confrontations between oppsing forces."

In addition to appearing in the saga's movies and TV series, several LucasArts games depict the player as a starfighter pilot.

In the Star Wars universe, starfighters are equipped with the same fictional technology found on other starships.

Sublight drives propel starfighters at below lightspeed velocities, with the most common type being the ion engine.

These engines are used to lift off from planetary surfaces, travel in deep space and engage other starships in space battles, while inertial dampeners protect the occupants from forceful accelerations.

Repulsorlifts are carried as secondary drives for atmospheric flight and when docking or making planetary landings.

Some starfighters are also equipped with an internal hyperdrive or connect to an external hyperdrive unit for faster-than-light travel.

The primary weapon on most starfighters are laser cannons, with additional weapons like proton torpedoes boasting additional firepower.

Some starfighters are also equipped with deflector shields which can be adjusted to protect specific areas of the ship.

== Starfighters appearing in the Original Trilogy ==


===
A-wing ===
The Kuat RZ-1 A-wing Interceptor is a class of starfighter, depicted as fast but fragile interceptors of the Rebel Alliance, conceived for high-speed surgical strikes, deep reconnaissance and escort fighter duty.
A-wings first appear in Return of the Jedi (1983) during the climactic Battle of Endor.

It gained popularity through its depiction in several video games, such as Battlefront II and 2015 Battlefront, and has been merchandised by several companies.

=== B-wing ===
The A/SF-01 B-wing starfighter is a fictional Rebel Alliance and New Republic starfighter.
They first appear in Return of the Jedi (1983) and subsequently in the Star Wars expanded universe's books, comics, and games.
A variety of B-wing merchandise has been released by toy companies.

Origin and designAlthough initial plans called for B-wings to appear in several scenes, its narrow appearance from some angles made it difficult to see against the backdrop of space.
The ship's rotating cockpit stems from an initial design for the Millennium Falcon.

DepictionThe B-wing's canonical origin (as the Blade Wing), as-designed by the Mon Calamari engineer Quarrie, is depicted in the Star Wars Rebels, second season episode "Wings of the Master".

Quarrie designed the Blade Wing to be a blockade buster for the Rebel Alliance, combining aspects of previous ships built by the Verpine Slayne & Korpil corporation including the V-19 Torrent starfighter, H-60 Tempest bomber and T-6 shuttle.

While Quarrie's Blade Wing helped the crew of the Ghost escape an Imperial blockade, the prototype was plagued with a number of technical challenges.

Senator Bail Organa was responsible for convincing Slayne & Korpil to work with Quarrie to fix these issues and create a production model, the A/SF-01, for the Rebel Alliance.
Expanded universe material states the A/SF-01 was the most well-armed starfighter in the Star Wars galaxy at the time it was introduced; a single B-wing was capable of attacking and destroying enemy capital ships.

However it was also slower and less maneuverable than any other Rebel starfighter and required the most maintenance.

The B-wing's gyrostabilized cockpit allowed the pilot to maintain a consistent horizon while the craft's body rotated around it, minimizing g-stresses on the pilot and letting them concentrate on flying and targeting.

However, if the gyro-stabilization system was not kept in prime condition, it could fail under the tremendous pressure and lock up.

The B-wing featured S-foils similar in function to those of the X-wing fighter.

MerchandiseBoth Kenner and Hasbro released B-wing toys, the B-wing is part of two Micro Machines three-packs, and Lego has made several B-wing sets.
A Micro Machines Alpha Fleet package includes models both of the B-wing's film appearance and of an initial production design.
Decipher and Wizards of the Coast published B-wing cards for the Star Wars Customizable Card Game and Star Wars Trading Card Game, respectively.
The second expansion pack for the X-Wing flight simulator, B-Wing, introduces the B-wing as a playable starfighter; several other LucasArts products also depict B-wings.

===
TIE fighter (and variants) ===
TIE fighters—and variants such as TIE interceptors and TIE bombers—appear throughout the original trilogy.
They are usually not equipped with shields or a hyperdrive, which makes them mass-producible and allows for considerable weapon payloads, or alternatively, for high speed and agility.
The pilot has to wear a pressurized suit, as TIE fighters also lack life support systems.

=== X-wing ===
The X-wing starfighter, named for the distinctive shape made when its S-Foils are in attack position, was a class of starfighter used by the Rebel Alliance in their conflict with the Galactic Empire.

It made its theatrical debut, as the T-65B model, in Star Wars (1977) as the spacecraft piloted by Luke Skywalker and the Red Squadron when Luke destroyed the Death Star.

The starfighter featured extensively in the Star Wars original trilogy and in the Expanded Universe that followed, and has been merchandised as a variety of toys and models.

=== Y-wing ===
The Y-wing assault starfighter/bomber are depicted as the primary fighter-bombers of the Galactic Republic, Rebel Alliance, New Republic, and the Resistance; being ideally suited for anti-shipping, close air support, and ground attack missions.

They made their theatrical appearance in Star Wars Episode IV:
A New Hope (1977) and have featured in movies, television shows, and
the Star Wars expanded universe's books, comics, and games.

== Starfighters appearing in the Prequel Trilogy ==


=== ARC-170 ===
The ARC-170 starfighter or Aggressive ReConnaissance-170 starfighter were flown by clone pilots of the Galactic Republic during the Clone Wars.
They first appear in the opening battle sequence of Star Wars:
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith (2005)
and have featured in the 2008 Clone Wars television series.
The fighter's name stems from "ART 170", the file name of the art that established the ship's appearance; during scripting it was simply referred to as the "Clone Fighter.
"According
to background material, the ARC-170 is a rugged and versatile starfighter that can fulfill a variety of roles.

A joint venture between the Incom and Subpro corporations, the ARC-170 measures 14.5 m (48 ft)
long, with a wingspan of 22.6 m (74 ft) and height of 4.78 m (15.7 ft).

Its crew includes a pilot, a co-pilot/forward gunner, a tail gunner, and an astromech droid to act as navigator and make repairs.

With its hyperdrive and five day's worth of supplies, the ARC-170 can operate deep behind enemy lines, where the variety of scanners and sensor jammers in its heavy nose help it conduct dangerous scouting missions.

Its weaponry includes a pair of forward-facing medium laser cannons, mated with targeting rangefinders, which are powerful enough to punch through capital ship armor plating; two aft-facing laser cannons for staving off pursuing starfighters; and six proton torpedoes which allow it to conduct bombing missions.

Deflector shielding protects the fighter from enemy attack and allows it to achieve hypersonic speed in an atmosphere by dispersing the heat created from air friction.
After the end of the Clone Wars, the ARC-170 would continue to serve under the Galactic Empire until replaced in favor of the TIE Fighter.

It would also serve as the in-universe inspiration for Incom's next starfighter, the X-wing.

Like the X-wing, the ARC-170 features S-foils, which open during combat to shed waste heat, enlarge the starfighter's deflector shields, and function as stabilizer surfaces during atmospheric flight.
===
Droid Tri-Fighter ===
Droid Tri-fighters are droid starfighters used by Separatist forces during the Clone Wars.

They made their first theatrical appearance in the opening battle of Revenge of the Sith (2005).
Original plans to equip the fighters with boosters were abandoned when Lucas decided they were an unnecessary distraction in the already chaotic scene.

Its curved braces are deliberately reminiscent of the Trade Federation's circular battleship.
The tri-fighter is a compact and heavily armed starfighter with three arms surrounding a rotating gyroscopic core.

Measuring 5.4 m (18 ft) long, with a 1.96 m (6 ft 5 in) wingspan and 3.45 m (11.3 ft) width, it's in-universe manufacturer are the Colicoids, the same species which produced Droideka.

They are more dangerous than Vulture droids thanks to an advanced heuristic droid brain which better learns from enemy tactics and can be linked to coordinate multi-fighter attacks.

While not as fast as a Jedi interceptor, the tri-fighter has three independent thrusters to give it impressive agility.

Four laser cannons, one light cannon on each arm and one nose-mounted medium cannon, can fire together or independently.

It can also carry between two and six missiles, including proton torpedoes, concussion missiles and buzz droids.

===
Geonosian starfighter ===
Geonosian Starfighters appear in the climactic Battle of Geonosis in Star Wars:
Episode II – Attack of the Clones when they chase after a Republic attack gunship carrying Anakin Skywalker (Hayden Christensen), Obi-Wan Kenobi (Ewan McGregor) and Padmé Amidala (Natalie Portman).

The craft was also set to appear in an air battle during which Republic attack gunships attack a Geonosian airstrip but the scenes were ultimately cut.

The starfighter technically made its first appearance in the video game
Star Wars: Jedi Starfighter which was released prior to the movie.
Within the Star Wars universe these craft were considered nimble fighters, working equally well in space or in an atmosphere, and afforded the pilot a 360° field of view.

Formally known as the Nantex-class starfighter and produced by the Huppla Pasa Tisc Shipwrights Collective, the Geonosian fighter is 9.8 m (32 ft) long, 1.9 m (6 ft 3 in) wide and 2.2 m (7 ft 3 in) tall (excluding the cockpit bubble).

In addition to a magnetically-suspended laser cannon turret, the fighter is equipped with 100 independently aiming narrow-beam tractor/repulsor projectors.

These projectors are used not only to grapple with other spacrcraft but to help maneuver the fighter by pulling or pushing against surrounding objects.

While these fighters are said to possess tremendous acceleration and maneuverability thanks to a unique engine mount (also magnetically suspended), few of these fighters are exported as they are designed specifically around Geonosian senses and dexterity to operate.

===
Jedi starfighter ===
The Delta-7 Aethersprite-class light interceptors (better known as "Jedi starfighters") appear in Star Wars Episode II:
Attack of the Clones (2002), when Obi-Wan Kenobi (Ewan McGregor) travels via Jedi starfighter to Kamino to investigate the attempted assassination of Padmé Amidala (Natalie Portman); he also flies a Jedi starfighter to Geonosis in an attempt to track down the bounty hunter Jango Fett (Temuera Morrison).

Later, Plo Koon (Matt Sloan) flies a Jedi starfighter when he is shot down by clone troopers carrying out Emperor Palpatine's (Ian McDiarmid) Order 66 in Revenge of the Sith (2005).

In the 2003 Clone Wars animated series, Anakin Skywalker is seen flying a customized Delta-7, called the Azure Angel, of which a Lego model was later made.
The Jedi starfighter's triangular shape stems from the shape of Imperial Star Destroyers in the original Star Wars trilogy.
Industrial Light & Magic designer Doug Chiang identified the Jedi starfighter as one of the first designs that bridges the aesthetic between the prequel and original trilogies.
Chiang noted that viewers' familiarity with the Star Destroyer's appearance and Imperial affiliation gives added symbolism to the Jedi craft's appearance and foreshadows the Empire's rise to power.

A full-scale model of the starfighter was also created for filming purposes.

During scenes taking place on the rain-swept landing pads of Kamino, the model had to be painted and specially prepared in order to resist any water damage.
Star Wars expanded universe material states that the Delta-7 was designed specifically with the Jedi's Force-aided reflexes in mind by stripping them down and making their controls as responsive as possible.

Manufactured for the Jedi by Kuat Systems Engineering, the starfighter measures just 8 m (26 ft) long, 3.92 m (12.9 ft)
wide and 1.44 m
(4 ft 9 in) high, making it difficult to detect.

An astromech droid fits in an off-center socket on the port side of the Delta-7, but the tiny fighter's size requires the droid's body be modified in order to fit (later Delta-7B models place the socket in front of the cockpit to allow full-sized astromech units).

A pair of laser cannons and deflector shielding allows the Jedi pilot to engage in combat, though ideally as a last resort.

Lacking an internal hyperdrive, the Jedi starfighter uses an external hyperspace transport wing to which it can attach for faster-than-light travel.
Its two Novaldex J-44 "Jetforce" sublight engines are equipped with electromagnetic thrust nozzles that focus and time engine bursts to match the Jedi's abilities.

This also makes the starfighter overwhelmingly difficult for a non-Jedi to pilot.

When the Jedi were destroyed after Order 66, Kuat Systems Engineering designed a new starfighter that would be more manageable for non-Jedi pilots: the A-wing.
===
Jedi interceptor ===
The Eta-2 Actis-class light interceptors, also known as "Jedi interceptors", made their first theatrical in Star Wars Episode III: Revenge of the Sith (2005).

In the opening space battle, Obi-Wan Kenobi (Ewan McGregor) and Anakin Skywalker (Hayden Christensen) pilot Jedi interceptors on a mission to rescue Chancellor Palpatine (Ian McDiarmid) from General Grievous.

The craft's design was purposefully meant to echo the earlier Jedi starfighter and the TIE Fighter, while its opening wing panels were influenced by a feature on Hasbro's toy model of the Jedi starfighter.

For filming close-ups of the actors, a single full-scale model of the Jedi interceptor was created.

Since Obi-Wan and Anakin's interceptors were individualized with their own color schemes, each actor would perform their scenes separately and switch out, allowing the model to be redressed in between.
In-universe material states that this new starfighter was meant to expand the Jedi's arsenal as they found themselves on the front lines of the Clone Wars, being smaller but possessing greater firepower than the earlier Delta-7 with twin laser cannons and twin ion cannons.

Also built by Kuat Systems Engineering, the Eta-2 is even smaller than the Delta-7 at just 5.47 m
(17.9 ft) long, 4.3 m (14 ft) wide and 2.5 m
(8 ft 2 in) high with wings deployed, though with enough space for an astromech droid socket inside the port wing.

It is also even more maneuverable with two ion engines that can deflect thrust up to 30 degrees.

The Eta-2 has no deflector shields or bulky flight controls in order to save weight and maximize speed and agility, instead relying on the Jedi's Force abilities to compensate.

In order to manage heat levels, the interceptor is fitted with S-foils on the tip of each wing which open to reveal radiator panels.

After the Jedi were destroyed during Order 66, the Eta-2 would serve as the inspiration for the Galactic Empire's TIE Fighter.

===
Naboo N-1 starfighter ===
The Naboo N-1 Starfighter made its theatrical appearance in Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace.

During the climactic Battle of Naboo, a squadron of the fighters attacked the orbiting Trade Federation Droid Control Ship Saak'ak.
Anakin Skywalker (Jake Lloyd) accidentally steals a Naboo N-1 starfighter and pilots it into the Droid Control Ship's docking bay, destroying the vessel from the inside.

N-1 Starfighters also appear in the beginning of Star Wars:
Episode II – Attack of the Clones escorting senator Padmé Amidala's (Natalie Portman)
Naboo Royal Cruiser upon its arrival to Coruscant.

The N-1 also appears at the end of the edited and remastered 2004 "Special Edition" DVD version of Return of the Jedi.

The fighter technically first appeared as an unlockable vehicle in Star Wars:
Rogue Squadron, which was released approximately six months before The Phantom Menace, and was available as a playable vehicle in the video games
Star Wars: Battle for Naboo and Star Wars: Starfighter.

The N-1 initially had the same angular design as craft in the original Star Wars trilogy; only in later designs did it take on a streamlined appearance.
A life-size model of a Naboo Starfighter hangs suspended from the ceiling of the Blue Wing at the Boston Museum of Science, in Boston, Massachusetts.
This 1:1 scale model was unveiled at the museum in April 2004, as a prelude to the Star Wars: Where Science Meets Imagination exhibit.
The model was previously used as a prop during the filming of The Phantom Menace.
Based on in-universe background material, the N-1's sleek design exemplifies the philosophy of art and function in Naboo technology.

At 11 m (36 ft) long, the starfighters are built by the Theed Palace Space Vessel Engineering Corps using a number of standard components in a custom-built spaceframe.

The chromium finish on the starfighter's forward surfaces indicate it's royal status as an escort for Naboo's Queen.

The "rat-tail" finial of the main body serves dual roles as a high-voltage charge collector and receiver of encrypted information when the fighter is plugged in at the palace hanger, while the secondary finials contain engine heat sinks.

Behind the pilot's cockpit, an astromech droid plugs in to perform in-flight navigation and maintenance, although the fighter is also equipped with a capable automatic pilot feature.

Armament includes twin laser cannons and twin proton torpedo launchers with a capacity for 10 torpedoes.
In a 2018 a test was conducted using the Autodesk Flow Design virtual wind tunnel program to look at the aerodynamic properties of several Star Wars starfighter models.

Of those models which were tested, the N-1 was found to be the most aerodynamic of all with a drag coefficient of .1, which while somewhat poor compared to the real-life .02 rating of the F-4E Phantom was significantly better than all other starfighters tested.

===
Porax-38 starfighter ===
The Porax-38 appears in Revenge of the Sith as a starfighter piloted by the native Utapauns during the Battle of Utapau.
Although featured in a full two-page spread in the Revenge of the Sith Incredible Cross-Sections book, the fighter's role was significantly reduced in the final film.

This was due to the fact that the P-38's digital model, being a late addition to the film, was not completed to the level originally planned, and so was relegated to a background craft.

===
Soulless One ===
The Soulless One was General Grievous' personal starfighter, a customized version of a Belbullab-22 starfighter, which made its first theatrical appearance in Revenge of the Sith (2005).

After Obi-Wan Kenobi (Ewan McGregor) defeated General Grievous on Utapau, he used Grievous' starfighter to escape from his clone troopers attempting to carry out Order 66 and rendezvoused with Yoda and Senator Bail Organa (Jimmy Smits).
=== V-wing ===
The V-wing Fighter or Alpha-3 Nimbus-class V-Wing made its theatrical appearance in the Revenge of the Sith (2005), as the Galactic Republic is formally transformed into the Galactic Empire.

Originally, animation director Rob Coleman proposed that TIE Fighters be featured to signify this transition, but George Lucas pointed out that (in the film's chronology) there were nineteen years between the events of Revenge of the Sith and the original Star Wars.

Allowing additional time for the TIE fighter to be introduced, a new starfighter was created instead, purposefully similar in both design and sound to the TIE fighter while also resembling the Jedi's Delta-7 starfighter.
According to Star Wars canon, the V-wing's design combines elements of the ARC-170, V-19 and Delta-7, making it an ideal escort fighter.

Introduced by Kuat Systems Engineering during the final days of the Clone Wars, the compact V-wing is just 7.9 m (26 ft)
long and 3.8 m (12 ft) wide, with its height expanding to 5.84 m (19.2 ft) when the wings are deployed.

An astromech droid assists the pilot with in-flight navigation and maintenance.

Two pairs of laser cannons on swivel mounts in the wing struts provide a rapid-fire offensive punch.

The V-wing is far more maneuverable than the ARC-170, making it perfect for combating swarms of Tri-fighters and Vulture droids, while a pair of powerful ion engines can propel the fighter to a top atmospheric speed of 52,000 km/h (32,000 mph).

In order to save on weight to make the fighter so fast and maneuverable, it does not feature a hyperdrive or pressurized cockpit.

Additionally, folding wings on either side of the hull contain radiator panels to manage heat levels during intense activity.

===
Vulture Droid ===
The Vulture Droid or Variable Geometry Self-Propelled Battle Droid is a droid starfighter that made its theatrical appearance in The Phantom Menace (1999) as part of the Trade Federation's space fleet and appeared again, slightly different, in Revenge of the Sith (2005), as a Separatist space unit (likely coming from the Trade Federation, which sells its droid forces to the CIS, as established in Attack of the Clones).
Original designs depicted the droid starfighter not as a droid itself, but instead piloted by a battle droid.

In order to demonstrate that it was both a robotic being as well as vehicle, it was decide to give the vulture droid a transformative element, allowing its wings to fold down and serve as legs.

Two 18" maquettes of the vulture droid were built - one in ship mode and one in walking mode - to help create the digital model.

In order to represent the idea of three vulture droids sharing one "brain," animators purposefully linked the motion of each three-ship flight when creating the climactic battle of The Phantom Menace.
As per Star Wars sources, vulture droids were originally produced by the Xi Char cathedral factories of Hoar Chall Engineering for the Trade Federation before later becoming a mainstay of Separatist fighter squadrons during the Clone Wars.

At 3.5 m (11 ft) long when in flight mode, these droid starfighters are designed to engage the enemy in overwhelming swarms, partially to overcome their lack of cunning and resourcefulness.

Electromagnetic thrust-vectoring makes vulture droids elusive targets to hit, powered by concentrated solid fuel slugs which provide tremendous power but with the drawback of limited range.

For armament the droid carries a pair of twin blaster cannons in the wings while two energy torpedo launchers are mounted in the main body; when the wings retract they conceal the blasters and protect them from microparticle and atmospheric corrosion.

When necessary, the droid can uses its repulsorlifts to land and transform into a four-legged walking configuration to occupy territory, angling its energy torpedo launchers for antipersonnel use.
Originally, vulture droids were controlled by a central command ship, but were later given a limited degree of independence.
A variant of the vulture droid is the Hyena Bomber Droid, with a larger, sturdier hull and larger wings.
It also has a second hull with downward-facing photoreceptors for precision bomb dropping.
The Hyena Bomber Droid made its first appearance in the 2008 Clone Wars television series.

== Starfighters appearing in other Star Wars media ==


=== E-wing ===
An improved successor to the X-wing, the E-wing first appeared in Dark Horse Comics' Dark Empire series.
They are one of few Expanded Universe vehicles to be a part of Micro Machines' Action Fleet line.
Armed with three Taim & Bak IX9 Medium Laser Cannons and two proton torpedo launchers, the E-wing's aerodynamic frame made the fighter highly maneuverable and exceptional in atmospheric flight.
Its Class 1 Hyperdrive allowed for extended reconnaissance missions and rapid strategic redeployment.
As part of a larger force, the E-wing filled a versatile mid-range multirole combat aircraft or light torpedo bomber.

===
Gauntlet Fighter ===
A Gauntlet Fighter, or Kom'rk-class fighter, is a Mandalorian class of ship.
Larger than most starfighters, it can carry a larger crew and accommodate passengers.
They were introduced in Star Wars:
The Clone Wars being used by the Mandalorian splinter group Deathwatch.

Another one known as the Nightbrother later served as Darth Maul's personal craft in Star Wars Rebels.

Kom'rk-class fighter/transports are equipped with four laser cannons, a Class 1 hyperdrive, and space to carry up to 24 soldiers.

Two versions of the starfighter model exist,
one 68 m (223 ft) long and a smaller variant 52.3 m
(172 ft) long.

===
Fanblade starfighter ===
Asajj Ventress flies the fanblade in the animated Star Wars: Clone Wars series.
Just as Ventress' appearance was inspired by a Samurai stance, the ship itself has Asian influences: its design is based on a sensu folding fan.

Background literature refers to these as Ginivex-class fanblade starfighters, with only six built for Asajj's personal use.

13.1 m (43 ft)
long, the starfighters' retractable solar sail helps make the ship extremely fast with a powerful deflector shield but also makes it easier to spot.

It is also equipped with a Class 1 hyperdrive and a rotating laser cannon mounted on either end of the solar sail.

=== U-wing ===
The UT-60D U-wing starfighter/support craft is a Rebel troop transport/gunship model manufactured by Incom Corporation for the purpose of supporting special operations forces insertion and extraction into denied areas from strategic distances.
Used to penetrate enemy zones to drop off Rebel infantry, provide close air support, and extract them upon mission completion.
U-wings first appeared in the movie Rogue One, where they were pivotal in the transport and protection of the Rebel Alliance's ground forces during the Battle of Scarif.

Origin and designDirector Gareth Edwards wanted Rogue One to be grounded in the aesthetics of the Korean or Vietnam War in order to contrast it with the more World War II look of the original Star Wars film.

Thus when it came time to design a unique ship for the film's heroes to travel around in, he wanted it to be akin to a "Huey" version of the X-wing.

While experimenting with different models and names ("Z-wing, R-wing, Q-wing, etc."),
the final design picked was in part because it looked like an inverted X-wing.

For filming interior scenes, a full-size U-wing cockpit was built and mounted on a manually controlled gimbal in front of a wall of LED panels.

The panels were used instead of traditional film lights so that more natural lighting could be simulated.

DepictionIn-universe material states that the UT-60 was the last starfighter design created by Incom Corporation before the company was nationalized by the Galactic Empire.

Originally intended as a transport ship for couriers and planetary defense forces, the last of the UT-60D starfighters to be built were secured for the Rebel Alliance thanks to the efforts of Senator Bail Organa (Jimmy Smits).

Rebel mechanics and technicians transformed their U-wings into sturdy gunships and troop transports for Rebel Alliance Special Forces (SpecForces) making dangerous insertions into Imperial territory.

The U-wing's engine configuration was inspired in part by the X-wing, and like the X-wing featured S-foils but in a variable-sweep wing format, opening them to improve atmospheric maneuverability and enlarge its deflector shield.

However the ship was not designed for the tight turns necessary for dogfights, and while the U-wing did feature a hyperdrive for faster-than-light travel, extended operations with a full passenger compliment would quickly deplete the vessel's life support systems.

The U-wing's two laser cannons could be supplemented by a pair of infantry heavy weapons handled by dedicated door gunners.

=== V-19 Torrent ===
The V-19 Torrent starfighter first appeared in the 2003 Clone Wars animated series and have appeared in other media related to the Clone Wars.

Background material states the V-19 had impressive speed and maneuverability, making it a tricky starfighter to fly.

It had three S-foils that functioned like those on the X-wing and was equipped with two laser cannons and twin concussion missile launchers.

At the beginning of the Clone Wars, V-19 starfighters did not have hyperdrives for faster-than-light travel, instead relying on external hyperspace transport rings to which they would attached.

Later models were modified to be equipped with an internal hyperdrive.

=== Z-95 Headhunter ===
The Z-95 Headhunter is a class of starfighter which was first described in the Brian Daley's 1979 novel Han Solo at Stars' End as having swing-wings and a bubble cockpit.
In the 1980–81 comic strip adaptation, they are depicted like triangular, twin-tailed airplanes.
The 1988 Tatooine Manhunt adventure book for Star Wars:
The Roleplaying Game depicts the Z-95 as a precursor to the X-wing, but with only two wings, based on an early Joe Johnston production sketch.
The Z-95 is featured variously in the Expanded Universe, including the Star Wars: X-wing Rogue Squadron comic series, as well as in 2008's The Clone Wars television series, in which it is used by the Galactic Republic.

The Z-95 Headhunter is described in the Star Wars Databank as "the forerunner of the ... X-wing", a versatile snub-fighter despite being outdated at the time of the Clone Wars.

Incom Corporation originally designed the Z-95 for planetary defense forces, and while lacking many features like a hyperdrive or astromech droid it was appreciated for its armaments and internal environmental controls.
The Republic commissioned upgraded models of the Z-95 for their clone pilots which featured more powerful weaponry and deflector shields, as well as superior endurance and adaptability.
At the beginning of the one-shot comic Age of Resistance: Rose Tico, a young Paige and Rose Tico find out who is a better pilot of the Z-95.
==
See also ==
List of Star Wars spacecraft
Star Wars planetary vehicles
Weapons in science fiction


==
Bibliography ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Index of Starship section of the Star Wars Encyclopedia - Includes several starfighters
Category:Starfighters on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Intricate Illustrations of Star Wars Spacecraft Cutouts Reveal Their Inner Mechanics by Leah Pellegrini April 23, 2016
Star Wars (retroactively titled Star Wars:
Episode IV  –
A New Hope) is a 1977 American epic space-opera film written and directed by George Lucas, produced by Lucasfilm and distributed by 20th Century Fox.
It stars Mark Hamill, Harrison Ford, Carrie Fisher, Peter Cushing, Alec Guinness, David Prowse, James Earl Jones, Anthony Daniels, Kenny Baker and Peter Mayhew.
It is the first installment of the original Star Wars trilogy, the first of the franchise to be produced, and the fourth episode of the "Skywalker saga".

Lucas had the idea for a science-fiction film in the vein of Flash Gordon around the time he completed his first film, THX 1138 (1971) and began working on a treatment after the release of American Graffiti (1973).
Star Wars focuses on the journey of Luke Skywalker (Hamill), who along with the wizened Jedi Master Obi-Wan Kenobi (Guinness), smuggler Han Solo (Ford), and his Wookiee companion Chewbacca (Mayhew), attempts to free Princess Leia (Fisher) from the clutches of the tyrannical Galactic Empire.
At the same time, the heroes try to deliver the plans for the Empire's planet-destroying space station, the Death Star, which are carried by the droids R2-D2 (Baker) and C-3PO (Daniels), to the Rebel Alliance, but face opposition from the Sith Lord Darth Vader (Prowse, voiced by Jones).

After a turbulent production, Star Wars was released in a limited number of theaters in the United States on May 25, 1977, and quickly became a blockbuster hit, leading to it being expanded to a much wider release.
The film opened to critical acclaim, most notably for its groundbreaking visual effects.
It grossed a total of $775 million, surpassing Jaws (1975) to become the highest-grossing film at the time until the release of E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial (1982).
When adjusted for inflation, Star Wars is the second-highest-grossing film in North America (behind Gone with the Wind) and the fourth-highest-grossing film in the world.
It received ten Oscar nominations (including Best Picture), winning seven.
In 1989, it became one of the first 25 films that was selected by the U.S. Library of Congress for preservation in the National Film Registry for being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant".
At the time, it was the most recent film in the registry and the only one chosen from the 1970s.
In 2004, its soundtrack was added to the U.S. National Recording Registry, and was additionally listed by the American Film Institute as the best movie score of all time a year later.
Today, it is widely regarded by many in the motion picture industry as one of the greatest and most important films in motion picture history.

The film has been reissued multiple times with Lucas's support—most significantly with its 20th-anniversary theatrical "Special Edition"—incorporating many changes including modified computer-generated effects, altered dialogue, re-edited shots, remixed soundtracks and added scenes.
The film became a pop-cultural phenomenon and launched an industry of tie-in products, including novels, comics, video games, amusement park attractions, and merchandise including toys, games, clothing and many other spin-off works.

The film's success led to two critically and commercially successful sequels, The Empire Strikes Back (1980) and Return of the Jedi (1983), and later to a prequel trilogy, a sequel trilogy, two anthology films and various spin-off TV series.

==
Plot ==
Amid a galactic civil war, Rebel Alliance spies have stolen plans  to the Galactic Empire's Death Star, a massive space station capable of destroying an entire planet.
Imperial Senator Princess Leia of Alderaan, secretly one of the Rebellion's leaders, has obtained its schematics, but her starship is intercepted by an Imperial Star Destroyer under the command of the ruthless Darth Vader.
Before she is captured, Leia hides the plans in the memory of astromech droid R2-D2, who flees in an escape pod to the desert planet Tatooine accompanied by protocol droid C-3PO.

The droids are captured by Jawa traders, who sell them to moisture farmers Owen and Beru Lars and their nephew Luke Skywalker.
While cleaning R2-D2, Luke accidentally triggers part of a holographic recording of Leia, in which she requests help from Obi-Wan Kenobi.
Later, after Luke finds R2-D2 missing, he is attacked by scavenging Sand People while searching for him, but is rescued by elderly hermit "Old Ben" Kenobi, an acquaintance of Luke's, who reveals that "Obi-Wan" is his true name.
Obi-Wan tells Luke of his days as one of the Jedi Knights, the former peacekeepers of the Galactic Republic who drew mystical abilities from a metaphysical energy field known as "the Force", but were ultimately hunted to near-extinction by the Empire.
Luke learns that his father fought alongside Obi-Wan as a Jedi Knight during the Clone Wars until Vader, Obi-Wan's former pupil, turned to the dark side of the Force and murdered him.
Obi-Wan presents Luke with his father's old lightsaber, the signature weapon of Jedi Knights.

R2-D2 plays Leia's full message, in which she begs Obi-Wan to take the Death Star plans to her home planet of Alderaan and give them to her father, a fellow veteran, for analysis.
Although Luke initially declines Obi-Wan's offer to accompany him to Alderaan and learn the ways of the Force, he is left with no choice after discovering that Imperial stormtroopers have killed his aunt and uncle and destroyed their farm in their search for the droids.
Traveling to a cantina in Mos Eisley to search for transport, Luke and Obi-Wan hire Han Solo, a smuggler with a price on his head due to his debt to local mobster Jabba the Hutt.
Pursued by stormtroopers, Obi-Wan, Luke, R2-D2 and C-3PO flee Tatooine with Han and his Wookiee co-pilot Chewbacca on their ship the Millennium Falcon.
As they reach the planet's orbit, two Star Destroyers try to intercept them, but Han is able to jump to hyperspace by reaching lightspeed.

Before the Falcon can reach Alderaan, Death Star commander Grand Moff Tarkin interrogates Leia about the location of the Rebels's secret base, with the threat of destroying her home planet, and, when she answers that the base is on Dantooine, he orders Alderaan destroyed simply as a show of force.
As the group arrives in the asteroid field that now stands in place of Alderaan, Han spots an Imperial TIE fighter and is taunted into chasing it and shooting it down, allowing the Falcon to be captured by the space station's tractor beam.
Inside the Death Star, Obi-Wan attempts to disable the tractor beam, and Luke persuades Han and Chewbacca to help him rescue Leia after discovering that she is scheduled to be executed.
After disabling the tractor beam, Obi-Wan sacrifices his life in a lightsaber duel with Vader, allowing the rest of the group to escape the Death Star with Leia.
Using a tracking device, the Empire tracks the Falcon to the hidden Rebel base, actually located on Yavin IV.

Leia's schematics reveal a hidden weakness in the Death Star's thermal exhaust port, which could allow the Rebels to trigger a chain reaction in its main reactor with a precise torpedo strike.
While Han abandons the Rebels after collecting his reward for rescuing Leia, Luke joins their starfighter squadron in a desperate attack against the approaching Death Star.
In the ensuing battle, the Rebels suffer heavy losses as Vader leads a squadron of TIE fighters against them, but Han unexpectedly returns to aid them in the Falcon, narrowly managing to save Luke before Vader can shoot him down.
Guided by the disembodied voice of Obi-Wan's spirit, Luke turns off his targeting computer and uses the Force to aim his torpedoes into the exhaust port, destroying the Death Star moments before it fires on the Rebel base.
In a triumphant ceremony at the base, Leia awards Luke and Han medals for their heroism.

== Cast ==
Mark Hamill as Luke Skywalker: A young adult raised by his aunt and uncle on Tatooine, who dreams of something more than his current life and learns the way of the Jedi.
Lucas favored casting young actors who lacked long experience.
To play Luke (then known as Luke Starkiller), Lucas sought actors who could project intelligence and integrity.
While reading the script, Hamill found the dialogue to be extremely odd because of its universe-embedded concepts.
He chose to simply read it sincerely, and he was cast instead of William Katt, who was subsequently cast in Brian De Palma's Carrie (Lucas shared a joint casting session with De Palma, a longtime friend).

Harrison Ford as Han Solo: A cynical smuggler hired by Obi-Wan and Luke
to take them to Alderaan in his ship, the Millennium Falcon, co-piloted with Chewbacca.
Lucas initially rejected casting Ford for the role, as he "wanted new faces"; Ford had previously worked with Lucas on American Graffiti.
Instead, Lucas asked Ford to assist in the auditions by reading lines with the other actors and explaining the concepts and history behind the scenes that they were reading.
Lucas was eventually won over by Ford's portrayal and cast him instead of Kurt Russell, Nick Nolte, Sylvester Stallone, Bill Murray, Christopher Walken, Burt Reynolds, Jack Nicholson, Al Pacino, Steve Martin, Chevy Chase, or Perry King (who later played Han Solo in the radio plays).

Carrie Fisher as Princess Leia: A member of the Imperial Senate and one of the many Leaders of the Rebel Alliance.
Many young Hollywood actresses auditioned for the role of Princess Leia, including Amy Irving, Terri Nunn (also a singer), Cindy Williams, Karen Allen, and Jodie Foster.
Foster, for one, turned down the role because she was already under contract with Disney and working on two films at the time.
Fisher was cast under the condition that she lose 10 pounds (4.5 kg) for the role.

Peter Cushing as Grand Moff Tarkin: Commander of the Death Star.
Lucas originally had Cushing in mind for the role of Obi-Wan Kenobi, but Lucas believed that "his lean features" would be better employed in the role of Grand Moff Tarkin instead.
Lucas commended Cushing's performance, saying "[He] is a very good actor.
Adored and idolized by young people and by people who go to see a certain kind of movie.
I feel he will be fondly remembered for the next 350 years at least.
"
Cushing, commenting on his role, joked: "I've often wondered what a 'Grand Moff' was.
It sounds like something that flew out of a cupboard."

Alec Guinness as Obi-Wan Kenobi:
An aging Jedi Master and former mentor of Darth Vader who introduces Luke to the Force.
Lucas' decision to cast "unknowns" was not taken favorably by his friend Francis Ford Coppola and the studio.
Lucas felt Obi-Wan Kenobi should be played by an established actor.
Producer Gary Kurtz said, "The Alec Guinness role required a certain stability and gravitas as a character... which meant we needed a very, very strong character actor to play that part."
Before Guinness was cast, Japanese actor Toshiro Mifune (who starred in many Akira Kurosawa films) was considered for the role.
According to Mifune's daughter, Mika Kitagawa, her father turned down Lucas' offers for Kenobi and Darth Vader because "he was concerned about how the film would look and that it would cheapen the image of samurai...
At the time, sci-fi movies still looked quite cheap as the effects were not advanced and he had a lot of samurai pride.
"
Guinness was one of the few cast members who believed that the film would be successful; he negotiated a deal for 2.25% of the one-fifth gross royalties paid to Lucas, which made him quite wealthy in later life.
He agreed to take the part of Kenobi on the condition that he would not have to do any publicity to promote the film.
Lucas credited him with inspiring the cast and crew to work harder, saying that Guinness contributed significantly to the completion of the filming.
Harrison Ford said, "It was, for me, fascinating to watch Alec Guinness.
He was always prepared, always professional, always very kind to the other actors.
He had a very clear head about how to serve the story."

Anthony Daniels as C-3PO: A protocol droid who is "fluent in over six million forms of communication".
Daniels auditioned for and was cast as C-3PO; he has said that he wanted the role after he saw a Ralph McQuarrie drawing of the character and was struck by the vulnerability in the robot's face.
Initially, Lucas did not intend to use Daniels' voice for C-3PO.
Thirty well-established voice actors read for the voice of the droid.
According to Daniels, one of the major voice actors, believed by some sources to be Stan Freberg, recommended Daniels' voice for the role.

Kenny Baker as R2-D2:
An astromech droid who is carrying the Death Star plans and a secret message for Obi-Wan from Princess Leia.
When filming was underway in London, where additional casting took place, Baker, performing a musical comedy act with his acting partner Jack Purvis, learned that the film crew was looking for a small person to fit inside a robot suit and maneuver it.
Baker, who was 3 feet 8 inches (1.12 m) tall, was cast immediately after meeting George Lucas.
He said, "He saw me come in and said 'He'll do' because I was the smallest guy they'd seen up until then."
He initially turned down the role three times, hesitant to appear in a film where his face would not be shown and hoping to continue the success of his comedy act, which had recently started to be televised.
R2-D2's recognizable beeps and squeaks were made by sound designer Ben Burtt imitating "baby noises", recording this voice as it was heard on an intercom, and creating the final mix using a synthesizer.

Peter Mayhew as Chewbacca "Chewie":
A 200-year-old Wookiee, Han Solo's sidekick, and first mate of the Millennium Falcon.
Mayhew learned of a casting call for Star Wars, which was being shot in London, and decided to audition.
The 7-foot-3-inch (2.21 m)
tall actor was immediately cast as Chewbacca after he stood up to greet Lucas.
He recounted,
I sat down on one of the sofas, waiting for George.
Door opened, and George walked in with Gary behind him.
So, naturally, what did I do?
I'm raised in England.
Soon as someone comes in through the door, I stand up.
George goes "Hmm [looked up]".
Virtually turned to Gary, and said "I think we've found him".

David Prowse as Darth Vader:
A Sith lord of the Galactic Empire who aims to destroy the Rebel Alliance.

James Earl Jones as the voice of Darth Vader.
Lucas originally intended for Orson Welles to voice the character after dismissing Prowse due to his West Country English accent (which led to him being nicknamed, within the cast, as "Darth Farmer").
However, determining that Welles' voice would be too familiar to audiences, Lucas instead cast then-relatively less recognizable Jones.
Other actors include Phil Brown and Shelagh Fraser as Luke's Uncle Owen and Aunt Beru; Jack Purvis, Kenny Baker's partner in his London comedy act, as the Chief Jawa in the film; and Eddie Byrne as Vanden Willard, a Rebel general.
Denis Lawson and Garrick Hagon played rebel pilots Wedge Antilles and Biggs Darklighter (Luke's childhood friend), respectively.
Don Henderson and Leslie Schofield appear as Imperial Generals Cassio Tagge and Moradmin Bast, respectively, and Richard LeParmentier plays Admiral Motti.
Alex McCrindle portrays General Jan Dodonna, Alfie Curtis portrays Dr. Evazan and Peter Geddis portrays Captain Raymus Antilles.
Michael Leader plays a minor role as a Stormtrooper known for accidentally hitting his helmet against a door.
Heavily synthesised audio recordings of John Wayne from earlier films were used as the voice of the Imperial spy Garindan.

==
Production ==


===
Development ===
Lucas had the idea for a space-fantasy film in 1971, after he completed directing his first full-length feature, THX 1138.
Originally, Lucas wanted to adapt the Flash Gordon space adventure comics and serials into his own films, having been fascinated by them since he was young.

He later said:

I especially loved the Flash Gordon serials ...
Of course I realize now how crude and badly done they were ...
loving them that much when they were so awful, I began to wonder what would happen if they were done really well.

At the Cannes Film Festival following the completion of THX 1138, Lucas pushed towards buying the Flash Gordon rights, but they were already tied-up with Dino De Laurentiis.
Lucas later recounted:

I wanted to make a Flash Gordon movie, with all the trimmings, but I couldn't obtain the rights to the characters.
So I began researching and went right back and found where Alex Raymond (who had done the original Flash Gordon comic strips in newspapers) had got his idea from.
I discovered that he'd got his inspiration from the works of Edgar Rice Burroughs (author of Tarzan) and especially from his John Carter of Mars series books.
I read through that series, then found that what had sparked Burroughs off was a science fantasy called Gulliver on Mars, written by Edwin Arnold and published in 1905.
That was the first story in this genre that I have been able to trace.
Jules Verne had got pretty close, I suppose, but he never had a hero battling against space creatures or having adventures on another planet.
A whole new genre developed from that idea.

Director Francis Ford Coppola, who accompanied Lucas in trying to buy the Flash Gordon rights, recounted in 1999: "
[George] was very depressed because he had just come back
and they wouldn't sell him Flash Gordon.
And he says, 'Well, I'll just invent my own.'"
He secured a two-film development deal with United Artists; the two films were American Graffiti and a space opera, tentatively titled "The Star Wars" and inspired by Flash Gordon.
Lucas would later claim that he had the idea for an original space opera long before 1971, and that he even tried to film it before American Graffiti.
Believing that the bleak tone of THX 1138 led to its poor reception, Lucas chose to make Star Wars more optimistic; this is what led to its fun and adventurous tone.

Lucas went to United Artists and showed them the script for American Graffiti, but they passed on the film, which was then picked up by Universal Pictures.
United Artists also passed on Lucas' space-opera concept, which he shelved for the time being.
After spending the next two years completing American Graffiti, Lucas turned his attention to his space opera.
He drew inspiration from politics of the era, later saying, “It was really about the Vietnam War, and that was the period where Nixon was trying to run for a [second] term.
"Lucas began writing in January 1973, "eight hours a day, five days a week", by taking small notes, inventing odd names and assigning them possible characterizations.
Lucas would discard many of these by the time the final script was written, but he included several names and places in the final script or its sequels.
He used these initial names and ideas to compile a two-page synopsis titled Journal of the Whills, which told the tale of the training of apprentice CJ Thorpe as a "Jedi-Bendu" space commando by the legendary Mace Windy.
Frustrated that his story was too difficult to understand, Lucas then began writing a 13-page treatment called The Star Wars on April 17, 1973, which had narrative parallels with Kurosawa's 1958 film The Hidden Fortress.
While impressed with the "innocence of the story, plus the sophistication of the world" of the film, United Artists declined to budget the film.
Lucas and producer Gary Kurtz presented the film treatment to Universal Pictures, the studio that financed American Graffiti; while they agreed it could be "a very commercial venture", they had doubts about Mr. Lucas' ability to pull it all off," and said that Lucas should follow American Graffiti with more consequential themes.
Walt Disney Productions also turned down the film.

Lucas said, "I've always been an outsider to Hollywood types.
They think I do weirdo films."
According to Kurtz, Lew Wasserman, the studio's head, "just didn't think much of science fiction at that time, didn't think it had much of a future then, with that particular audience."
He said that "science fiction wasn't popular in the mid-'70s ...
what seems to be the case generally is that the studio executives are looking for what was popular last year, rather than trying to look forward to what might be popular next year."
Kurtz said, "Although Star Wars wasn't like [then-current science fiction] at all, it was just sort of lumped into that same kind of category.
"Lucas explained in 1977 that the film is not "about the future" and that it "is a fantasy much closer to the Brothers Grimm than it is to 2001."
He added: "My main reason for making it was to give young people an honest, wholesome fantasy life, the kind my generation had.
We had Westerns, pirate movies, all kinds of great things.
Now they have The Six Million Dollar Man and Kojak.
Where are the romance, the adventure, and the fun that used to be in practically every movie made?"
Lucas would later recontextualize the discussion around the film, saying it was born out of research into "psychological underpinings of mythology", a claim that had been dismissed by Kurtz as self-aggrandizing: "
The whole idea of Star Wars as a mythological thing, I think came about because of [later Lucas] interviews that tied it to The Hero with a Thousand Faces" and by Steven Hart and Michael Kaminski: "It is here that the true origin of Star Wars comes from -- not from myth and legend, but from the 'schlock' sold on newspapers stands and played in matinees.
"There were also concerns regarding the project's potentially high budget.
Lucas and Kurtz, in pitching the film, said that it would be "low-budget, Roger Corman style, and the budget was never going to be more than—
well, originally we had proposed about 8 million, it ended up being about 10.
Both of those figures are very low budget by Hollywood standards at the time."
After Disney rejected the project, Lucas and Kurtz persisted in securing a studio to support the film because "other people had read it and said, 'Yeah, it could be a good idea.'
"
Lucas pursued Alan Ladd Jr., the head of 20th Century-Fox, and in June 1973 completed a deal to write and direct the film.
Although Ladd did not grasp the technical side of the project, he believed that Lucas was talented.
Lucas later stated that Ladd "invested in me, he did not invest in the movie."
The deal gave Lucas $150,000 to write and direct the film.
American Graffiti's positive reception afforded Lucas the leverage necessary to renegotiate his deal with Ladd and request the sequel rights to the film in August 1973.
For Lucas, this deal protected Star Wars's potential sequels and most of the merchandising profits.

===
Writing ===
Since commencing his writing process in January 1973, Lucas had done "various rewrites in the evenings after the day's work."
He would write four different screenplays for Star Wars, "searching for just the right ingredients, characters and storyline.
It's always been what you might call a good idea in search of a story.
"
By May 1974, he had expanded the treatment for The Star Wars into a rough draft screenplay, adding elements such as the Sith, the Death Star, and a general by the name of Annikin Starkiller.
He changed Starkiller to an adolescent boy, and he shifted the general into a supporting role as a member of a family of dwarfs.
Lucas envisioned the Corellian smuggler, Han Solo, as a large, green-skinned monster with gills.
He based Chewbacca on his Alaskan Malamute dog, Indiana (whom he would later use as eponym for his character Indiana Jones), who often acted as the director's "co-pilot" by sitting in the passenger seat of his car.
Lucas completed a second draft in January 1975 as Adventures of the Starkiller, Episode One: The Star Wars, making heavy simplifications and introducing the young hero on a farm as Luke Starkiller.
Annikin became Luke's father, a wise Jedi knight.
"
The Force" was also introduced as a mystical energy field.
This draft still had some differences from the final version in the characters and relationships.
For example, Luke had several brothers, as well as his father, who appears in a minor role at the end of the film.
The script became more of a fairy tale quest as opposed to the action/adventure of the previous versions.
This version ended with another text crawl, previewing the next story in the series.
This draft was also the first to introduce the concept of a Jedi turning to the dark side: the draft included a historical Jedi who was the first to ever fall to the dark side, and then trained the Sith to use it.
The script would introduce the concept of a Jedi Master and his son, who trains to be a Jedi under his father's friend; this would ultimately form the basis for the film and, later, the trilogy.
However, in this draft, the father is a hero who is still alive at the start of the film.
Han Solo and Chewbacca's identities closely resembled those seen in the finished film.
According to Lucas, the second draft was over 200 pages long, and led him to split up the story into multiple films spanning over multiple trilogies.
Lucas began to rewrite this draft, creating a synopsis for the third draft.
During work on this rewrite, Lucas began researching the science-fiction genre by watching films and reading books (including J. R. R. Tolkien's The Hobbit) and comics.
He also claims to have read scholastic works like Joseph Campbell's The Hero with a Thousand Faces, James George Frazer's The Golden Bough, and even Bruno Bettelheim's The Uses of Enchantment.
These claims are doubted by Michael Kaminski and Chris Taylor, with Kaminski pointing out that Bettelheim's book would not come out until after Star Wars was filmed and adding that "the original trilogy-Campbell connection is greatly exaggerated and practically non-existent", noting that, in fact, the second draft is "even closer to Campbell's structure" than the third.
According to Lucas, he wrote a rough draft of about 250–300 pages long, which contained the outline for the entire original Star Wars trilogy.
He realized that it was too long for a single film, and decided to subdivide it into a trilogy.
Lucas stated that the story evolved over time and that "There was never a script completed that had the entire story as it exists now [in 1983] ...
As the stories unfolded, I would take certain ideas and save them ...
I kept taking out all the good parts, and I just kept telling myself I would make other movies someday."
He later described that, having split the script into three episodes, "the first part didn't really work", so he had to take the ending off of Episode VI and put it in the original Star Wars, which resulted in a Death Star being included in both films.

In 1975 Lucas suggested he could make a trilogy, which "ends with the destruction of the Empire" and a possible prequel "about the backstory of Kenobi as a young man."
After the film's smash success, Lucasfilm announced that Lucas had already written "twelve stories in the Adventures of Luke Skywalker" which, according to Kurtz, were set to be "separate adventures rather than direct sequels.
"During
the writing of the third draft, Lucas hired conceptual artist Ralph McQuarrie to create paintings of certain scenes, several of which Lucas included with his screenplay when he delivered it to 20th Century-Fox.
On February 27, the studio granted a budget of $5 million; this was later increased to $8.25 million.
Subsequently, Lucas started writing with a budget in mind, conceiving the cheap, "used" look of much of the film, and (with Fox having just shut down its special effects department) reducing the number of complex special effects shots called for by the script.

The third draft, dated August 1, 1975, was titled The Star Wars From the Adventures of Luke Starkiller.
This third draft had most of the elements of the final plot, with only some differences in the characters and settings.
The draft characterized Luke as an only child, with his father already dead, replacing him with a substitute named Ben Kenobi.
This script would be re-written for the fourth and final draft, dated January 1, 1976, as The Adventures of Luke Starkiller as taken from the Journal of the Whills, Saga I:
The Star Wars.
Lucas worked with his friends Gloria Katz and Willard Huyck to revise the fourth draft into the final pre-production script.
Lucas finished writing his script in March 1976, when the crew started filming.
He said, "What finally emerged through the many drafts of the script has obviously been influenced by science-fiction and action-adventure
I've read and seen.
And I've seen a lot of it.
I'm trying to make a classic sort of genre picture, a classic space fantasy in which all the influences are working together.
There are certain traditional aspects of the genre I wanted to keep and help perpetuate in Star Wars."
During production, he changed Luke's name from Starkiller to Skywalker and altered the title to The Star Wars and later Star Wars.
He would also continue to tweak the script during filming, including adding the death of Obi-Wan after realizing he served no purpose in the ending of the film.
For the film's opening crawl, Lucas originally wrote a composition consisting of six paragraphs with four sentences each.
He said, "The crawl is such a hard thing because you have to be careful that you're not using too many words that people don't understand.
It's like a poem.
"
Lucas showed his draft to his friends.
Director Brian De Palma, who was there, described it: "
The crawl at the beginning looks like it was written on a driveway.
It goes on forever.
It's gibberish."
Lucas recounted what De Palma said the first time he saw it: "George, you're out of your mind!
Let me sit down and write this for you."
De Palma and Jay Cocks helped edit the text into the form used in the film.
===
Design ===
George Lucas recruited many conceptual designers, including Colin Cantwell, who worked on 2001: A Space Odyssey (1968), to conceptualize the initial spacecraft models; Alex Tavoularis to create the preliminary conceptual storyboard sketches of early scripts; and Ralph McQuarrie to visualize the characters, costumes, props and scenery.
McQuarrie's pre-production paintings of certain scenes from Lucas's early screenplay drafts helped 20th
Century-Fox visualize the film, which positively influenced their decision to fund the project.
After McQuarrie's drawings for Lucas's colleagues Hal Barwood and Matthew Robbins (who were collaborating for a film) caught his interest, Lucas met with McQuarrie to discuss his plans for the untitled space fantasy film he wanted to make.
Two years later, after completing American Graffiti, Lucas approached McQuarrie and asked him if he would be interested "in doing something for Star Wars."
McQuarrie produced a series of artworks from simple sketches; these set a visual tone for the film, and for the rest of the original trilogy.

The film was ambitious as Lucas wanted to create fresh prop prototypes and sets (based on McQuarrie's paintings) that had never been realized before in science fiction films.
He commissioned production designers John Barry and Roger Christian, who were working on the sets of the film Lucky Lady (1975) when Lucas first approached them, to work on the production sets.
Christian recounted in 2014: "George came to the set I was doing, it was an old salt factory design
and he helped me shovel salt, just like two students in plaid shirts and sneakers.
And we spoke and he looked at the set and couldn't believe it wasn't real.
"
They had a conversation with Lucas on what he would like the film to appear like, with them creating the desired sets.
Christian said that Lucas "didn't want anything [in Star Wars] to stand out, he wanted it [to look] all real and used.
And I said, 'Finally somebody's doing it the right way.
'"Lucas described a "used future" concept to the production designers in which all devices, ships, and buildings to do with Tatooine or the Rebels looked aged and dirty, as opposed to the sleeker designs of the Empire.
Lucas also wanted the spaceships to look "cobbled together, as opposed to a sleek monoshape."
Barry said that the director "wants to make it look like it's shot on location on your average everyday
Death Star or Mos Eisley Spaceport or local cantina.
"
Lucas believed that "what is required for true credibility is a used future", opposing the interpretation of "future in most futurist movies" that "always looks new and clean and shiny."
Christian supported Lucas's vision, saying "All science fiction before was very plastic and stupid uniforms and Flash Gordon stuff.
Nothing was new.
George was going right against that.
"The
designers started working with the director before Star Wars was approved by 20th Century-Fox.
For four to five months, in a studio in Kensal Rise, England, they attempted to plan the creation of the props and sets with "no money."
Although Lucas initially provided funds using his earnings from American Graffiti, it was inadequate.
As they could not afford to dress the sets, Christian was forced to use unconventional methods and materials to achieve the desired look.
He suggested that Lucas use scrap in making the dressings, and the director agreed.
Christian said, "I've always had this idea.
I used to do it with models when I was a kid.
I'd stick things on them and we'd make things look old."
Barry, Christian, and their team began designing the props and sets at Elstree Studios.
According to Christian, the Millennium Falcon set was the most difficult to build.
Christian wanted the interior of the Falcon to look like that of a submarine.
He found scrap airplane metal "that no one wanted in those days and bought them."
He began his creation process by breaking down jet engines into scrap pieces, giving him the chance to "stick it in the sets in specific ways.
"
It took him several weeks to finish the chess set (which he described as "the most encrusted set") in the hold of the Falcon.
The garbage compactor set "was also pretty hard, because I knew I had actors in there
and the walls had to come in, and they had to be in dirty water
and I had to get stuff that would be light enough so it wouldn't hurt them but also not bobbing around.
"
A total of 30 sets consisting of planets, starships, caves, control rooms, cantinas, and the Death Star corridors were created; all of the nine sound stages at Elstree were used to accommodate them.
The massive rebel hangar set was housed at a second sound stage at Shepperton Studios; the stage was the largest in Europe at the time.

===
Filming ===
In 1975, Lucas formed his own visual effects company Industrial Light & Magic (ILM) after discovering that 20th Century-Fox's visual effects department had been disbanded.
ILM began its work on Star Wars in a warehouse in Van Nuys.
Most of the visual effects used pioneering digital motion control photography developed by John Dykstra and his team, which created the illusion of size by employing small models and slowly moving cameras.
George Lucas tried "to get a cohesive reality" for his feature.
However, since the film is a fairy tale, as he had described, "I still wanted it to have an ethereal quality, yet be well composed and, also, have an alien look."
He designed the film to have an "extremely bizarre, Gregg Toland-like surreal look with strange over-exposed colors, a lot of shadows, a lot of hot areas.
"
Lucas wanted Star Wars to embrace the combination of "strange graphics of fantasy" and "the feel of a documentary" to impress a distinct look.
To achieve this, he hired the British cinematographer Gilbert Taylor.
Originally, Lucas's first choice for the position was Geoffrey Unsworth, who also provided the cinematography for Stanley Kubrick's 2001: A Space Odyssey.
Unsworth was interested in working with the director, and initially accepted the job when it was offered to him by Lucas and Kurtz.
However, he eventually withdrew to work on the Vincente Minnelli-directed A Matter of Time (1976)
instead, which "really annoy[ed]" Kurtz.
Lucas called up for other cinematographers, and eventually chose Taylor, basing his choice on Taylor's cinematography for Dr. Strangelove and A Hard Day's Night (both 1964).
On his decision, Lucas said: "I thought they were good, eccentrically photographed pictures with a strong documentary flavor.
"Taylor said that Lucas, who was consumed by the details of the complicated production, "avoided all meetings and contact with me from day one, so I read the extra-long script many times and made my own decisions as to how I would shoot the picture."
Taylor also said, "I took it upon myself to experiment with photographing the lightsabers and other things onstage before we moved on to our two weeks of location work in Tunisia.
"
Taylor was aware of the "enormous amount of process work" to follow principal photography and believed "a crisp result would help.
"During production, Lucas and Taylor—whom Kurtz called "old-school" and "crotchety"—had disputes over filming.
With a background in independent filmmaking, Lucas was accustomed to creating most of the elements of the film himself.
His lighting suggestions were rejected by Taylor, who believed that Lucas was overstepping his boundaries by giving specific instructions, sometimes even moving lights and cameras himself.
Taylor refused to use the soft-focus lenses and gauze Lucas wanted after Fox executives complained about the look.
Kurtz stated that "In a couple of scenes ... rather than saying, 'It looks a bit over lit, can you fix that?', [
Lucas would] say, 'turn off this light, and turn off that light.'
And Gil would say, 'No, I won't do that
, I've lit it the way I think it should be—tell me what's the effect that you want, and I'll make a judgment about what to do with my lights.'"

Originally, Lucas envisioned the planet of Tatooine, where much of the film would take place, as a jungle planet.
Gary Kurtz traveled to the Philippines to scout locations; however, because of the idea of spending months filming in the jungle would make Lucas "itchy", the director refined his vision and made Tatooine a desert planet instead.
Kurtz then researched all American, North African, and Middle Eastern deserts, and found Tunisia, near the Sahara desert, as the ideal location.
Lucas later stated that he had wanted to make it look like outer space.
When principal photography began on March 22, 1976, in the Tunisian desert for the scenes on Tatooine, the project faced several problems.
Lucas fell behind schedule in the first week of shooting due to malfunctioning props and electronic breakdowns.
Moreover, a rare Tunisian rainstorm struck the country, which further disrupted filming.
Taylor said, "you couldn't really see where the land ended and the sky began.
It was all a gray mess, and the robots were just a blur.
"
Given this situation, Lucas requested heavy filtration, which Taylor rejected, who said: "I thought the look of the film should be absolutely clean ...
But George saw it differently, so we tried using nets and other diffusion.
He asked to set up one shot on the robots with a 300mm, and the sand and sky just mushed together.
I told him it wouldn't work, but he said that was the way he wanted to do the entire film, all diffused.
"
This difference was later settled by 20th Century-Fox executives, who backed Taylor's suggestion.
Filming began in Chott el Djerid, while a construction crew in Tozeur took eight weeks to transform the desert into the desired setting.
Other locations included the sand dunes of the Tunisian desert near Nafta, where a scene featuring a giant skeleton of a creature lying in the background as R2-D2 and C-3PO make their way across the sands was filmed.
When actor Anthony Daniels wore the C-3PO outfit for the first time in Tunisia, the left leg piece shattered down through the plastic covering his left foot, stabbing him.
He also could not see through his costume's eyes, which was covered with gold to prevent corrosion.
Abnormal radio signals caused by the Tunisian sands made the radio-controlled R2-D2 models run out of control.
Kenny Baker, who portrayed R2-D2, said: "I was incredibly grateful each time an [R2] would actually work right."
After several scenes were filmed against the volcanic canyons outside Tozeur, production moved to Matmata to film Luke's home on Tatooine.
Lucas chose Hotel Sidi Driss, which is larger than the typical underground dwellings, to shoot the interior of Luke's homestead.
Additional scenes for Tatooine were filmed at Death Valley in North America.

After two and a half weeks of filming in Tunisia, production moved to Elstree Studios, near London, to film interior scenes.
Elstree was chosen as a studio over other options in Hollywood or elsewhere.
Star Wars required the use of nine different sound stages simultaneously, which most studios couldn't accommodate.
Because of stricter working conditions, filming in Britain had to finish by 5:30 pm, unless Lucas was in the middle of a scene.
Despite Lucas's efforts, his crew had little interest in the film.
Most of the crew considered the project a "children's film", rarely took their work seriously, and often found it unintentionally humorous.
Actor Baker later confessed that he thought the film would be a failure.
Harrison Ford found it strange that "there's a princess with weird buns in her hair", and called Chewbacca a "giant in a monkey suit.
"The
Elstree sets designed by John Barry, according to Gilbert Taylor, "were like a coal mine."
He said that "they were all black and gray, with really no opportunities for lighting at all."
To resolve the problem, he worked the lighting into the sets by chopping in its walls, ceiling and floors.
This would result in "a 'cut-out' system of panel lighting", with quartz lamps that could be placed in the holes in the walls, ceiling and floors.
His idea was supported by the Fox studio, which agreed that "we couldn't have this 'black hole of Calcutta.'
"
The lighting approach Taylor devised "allowed George to shoot in almost any direction without extensive relighting, which gave him more freedom."
In total, the filming in Britain took 14 and a half weeks.

Lucas commissioned computer programmer Larry Cuba to create the animated Death Star plans shown at the rebel base on Yavin 4.
This was written with the GRASS programming language, exported to a Vector General monitor and filmed on 35 mm to be rear-projected on the set.
It is the only computer animation in the original version of the film.
The Yavin scenes were filmed in the Mayan temples at Tikal, Guatemala.
Lucas selected the location as a potential filming site after seeing a poster of it hanging at a travel agency while he was filming in Britain.
This inspired him to send a film crew to Guatemala in March 1977 to shoot scenes.
While filming in Tikal, the crew paid locals with a six pack of beer to watch over the camera equipment for several days.
While shooting, Lucas rarely spoke to the actors, who believed that he expected too much of them while providing little direction.
His directions to the actors usually consisted of the words "faster" and "more intense".
Kurtz stated that "it happened a lot where he would just say, 'Let's try it again a little bit faster.'
That was about the only instruction he'd give anybody.
A lot of actors don't mind—
they don't care, they just get on with it.
But some actors really need a lot of pampering and a lot of feedback, and if they don't get it, they get paranoid that they might not be doing a good job."
Kurtz has said that Lucas "wasn't gregarious, he's very much a loner and very shy, so he didn't like large groups of people
, he didn't like working with a large crew, he didn't like working with a lot of actors.
"Ladd offered Lucas some of the only support from the studio; he dealt with scrutiny from board members over the rising budget and complex screenplay drafts.
Initially, Fox approved $8 million for the project; Gary Kurtz said: "we proceeded to pick a production plan and do a more final budget with a British art department and look for locations in North Africa, and kind of pulled together some things.
Then, it was obvious that 8 million wasn't going to do it—they had approved 8 million."
After requests from the team that "it had to be more," the executives "got a bit scared.
"
For two weeks, Lucas and his crew "didn't really do anything except kind of pull together new budget figures.
"
At the same time, after production fell behind schedule, Ladd told Lucas he had to finish production within a week
or he would be forced to shut down production.
Kurtz said that "it came out to be like 9.8 or .9 or something like that, and in the end they just said, 'Yes, that's okay
, we'll go ahead.'
"
The crew split into three units, with those units led by Lucas, Kurtz, and production supervisor Robert Watts.
Under the new system, the project met the studio's deadline.
During production, the cast attempted to make Lucas laugh or smile, as he often appeared depressed.
At one point, the project became so demanding that Lucas was diagnosed with hypertension and exhaustion and was warned to reduce his stress level.
Post-production was equally stressful due to increasing pressure from 20th Century-Fox.
Moreover, Mark Hamill's car accident left his face visibly scarred, which restricted re-shoots.

===
Post-production ===
Star Wars was originally slated for release on Christmas 1976; however, its production delays pushed the film's release to mid-1977.
Editor John Jympson began cutting the film together while Lucas was still filming in Tunisia; as Lucas noted, the editor was in an "impossible position" because Lucas had not explained any of the film's material to him.
When Lucas watched Jympson's rough cut for the first time, he disliked what he saw.
J. W. Rinzler wrote that "Jympson's selection of takes was questionable, and he seemed to be having trouble doing match-cuts.
"
Lucas was prepared to give Jympson more time; Jympson disliked Lucas' working style.
As production went on, Lucas still disapproved of Jympson's cut and fired him halfway through the film's production.
He commented: "Unfortunately it didn't work out.
It's very hard when you are hiring people to know if they are going to mesh with you
and if you are going to get what you want.
In the end, I don't think he fully understood the movie and
what I was trying to do.
I shoot in a very peculiar way, in a documentary style, and it takes a lot of hard editing to make it work."
After attempting to persuade Jympson to cut the film his way, Lucas replaced him with Paul Hirsch, Richard Chew and his then-wife, Marcia Lucas, who was also cutting the film New York, New York (1977) with Lucas's friend Martin Scorsese.
Richard Chew considered the film to  have been cut in a slow, by-the-book manner: scenes were played out in master shots that flowed into close-up coverage.
He found that the pace was dictated by the actors instead of the cuts.
Hirsch and Chew worked on two reels simultaneously.
Jympson's original assembly contained a large amount of footage which differed from the final cut of the film, including several alternate takes and a number of scenes which were subsequently deleted to improve the narrative pace.
The most significant material cut was a series of scenes from the first part of the film which introduced Luke Skywalker.
These early scenes, set in Anchorhead on the planet Tatooine, presented the audience with Luke's everyday life among his friends as it is affected by the space battle above the planet; they also introduced the character of Biggs Darklighter, Luke's closest friend who departs to join the rebellion.
Chew explained the rationale behind removing these scenes as a narrative decision: "In the first five minutes, we were hitting everybody with more information than they could handle.
There were too many story lines to keep straight: the robots and the Princess, Vader, Luke.
So we simplified it by taking out Luke and Biggs.
"
In an examination of this early cut, which has come to be called the "Lost Cut", David West Reynolds noted the film adopted a "documentary-like" approach that emphasized "clarity, especially in geographic and spatial relationships" over "dramatic or artistic concerns".
As a result, the film was more "leisurely paced".
Reynolds estimated this early cut contained "30-40%" different footage from the final cut, with most of the differences coming from extended cuts or alternate takes rather than deleted scenes.
After viewing a rough cut, Alan Ladd likened the early Anchorhead scenes to "American Graffiti in outer space.
"
Lucas was looking for a way of accelerating the storytelling, and removing Luke's early scenes would distinguish Star Wars from his earlier teenage drama and "get that American Graffiti feel out of it."
Lucas also stated that he wanted to move the narrative focus to C-3PO and R2-D2: "At the time, to have the first half-hour of the film be mainly about robots was a bold idea.
"Meanwhile, Industrial Light & Magic was struggling to achieve unprecedented special effects.
The company had spent half of its budget on four shots that Lucas deemed unacceptable.
With hundreds of uncompleted shots remaining, ILM was forced to finish a year's work in six months.
Lucas inspired ILM by editing together aerial dogfights from old war films, which enhanced the pacing of the scenes.
Sound designer Ben Burtt had created a library of sounds that Lucas referred to as an "organic soundtrack."
Blaster sounds were a modified recording of a steel cable, under tension, being struck.
The lightsaber sound effect was developed by Burtt as a combination of the hum of idling interlock motors in aged movie projectors and interference caused by a television set on a shieldless microphone.
Burtt discovered the latter accidentally as he was looking for a buzzing, sparking sound to add to the projector-motor hum.
For Chewbacca's growls, Burtt recorded and combined sounds made by dogs, bears, lions, tigers, and walruses to create phrases and sentences.
Lucas and Burtt created the robotic voice of R2-D2 by filtering their voices through an electronic synthesizer.
Darth Vader's breathing was achieved by Burtt breathing through the mask of a scuba regulator implanted with a microphone, which began the idea of Vader having been a burn-victim, which was not the case during production.
In February 1977, Lucas screened an early cut of the film for Fox executives, several director friends, along with Roy Thomas and Howard Chaykin of Marvel Comics who were preparing a Star Wars comic book.
The cut had a different crawl from the finished version and used Prowse's voice for Darth Vader.
It also lacked most special effects; hand-drawn arrows took the place of blaster beams, and when the Millennium Falcon fought TIE fighters, the film cut to footage of World War II dogfights.
The reactions of the directors present, such as Brian De Palma, John Milius, and Steven Spielberg, disappointed Lucas.
Spielberg, who said he was the only person in the audience to have enjoyed the film, believed that the lack of enthusiasm was due to the absence of finished special effects.
Lucas later said that the group was honest and seemed bemused by the film.
In contrast, Ladd and the other studio executives loved the film; Gareth Wigan told Lucas: "This is the greatest film I've ever seen" and cried during the screening.
Lucas found the experience shocking and rewarding, having never gained any approval from studio executives before.
The delays increased the budget from $8 million to $11 million.
With the project $2 million over budget, Lucas was forced to make numerous artistic compromises to complete Star Wars.
Ladd reluctantly agreed to release an extra $20,000 funding and in early 1977 second unit filming completed a number of sequences including exterior desert shots for Tatooine in Death Valley and China Lake Acres in California, and exterior Yavin jungle shots in Guatemala, along with additional studio footage to complete the Mos Eisley Cantina sequence.

Lucas had to write around a scene featuring a human Jabba the Hutt, which was scrapped due to not being in focus.
Lucas would later claim he wanted to superimpose a stop-motion creature over the actor - which he did in the 1997 Special Edition with a computer-generated version of Jabba.
However, all the script drafts (with the exception of one that Lucas doctored after the fact) describe Jabba as humanoid, the notion of him being an alien not having come up until work on the 1979 re-release, and scrapped until the Special Edition.

==
Soundtrack ==
On the recommendation of his friend Steven Spielberg, George Lucas hired composer John Williams.
Williams had worked with Spielberg on the film Jaws, for which he won an Academy Award.
Lucas originally hired Williams to consult on music editing choices and to compose the source music for the music, telling Williams that he intends to use extant music.
Lucas believed that the film would portray visually foreign worlds, but that the musical score would give the audience an emotional familiarity; he wanted a grand musical sound for Star Wars.
Therefore, Lucas assembled his favorite orchestral pieces for the soundtrack, until Williams convinced him that an original score would be unique and more unified, having viewed Lucas' music choices as a temp track.
However, a few of Williams' eventual pieces were influenced by the temp track: the "Main Title Theme" was inspired by the theme from the 1942 film Kings Row, scored by Erich Wolfgang Korngold; and the track "Dune Sea of Tatooine" drew from the soundtrack of Bicycle Thieves, scored by Alessandro Cicognini.
Lucas would later deny having ever conceived using extant music for the film.
In March 1977, Williams conducted the London Symphony Orchestra to record the Star Wars soundtrack in 12 days.
The original soundtrack was released as a double LP in 1977 by 20th Century Records.
20th Century Records also released The Story of Star Wars that same year, a narrated audio drama adaptation of the film utilizing some of its original music, dialogue, and sound effects.
The American Film Institute's list of best film scores ranks the Star Wars soundtrack at number one.

==
Cinematic and literary allusions ==
According to George Lucas, different concepts of the film were inspired by numerous sources, such as Beowulf and King Arthur for the origins of myth and religion.
Lucas had originally intended to remake the 1930s Flash Gordon film serials, but was unable to obtain the rights; thus, he resorted to drawing from Akira Kurosawa's 1958 film The Hidden Fortress and, allegedly, Joseph Campbell's The Hero with a Thousand Faces.
Star Wars features many elements derived from Flash Gordon, such as the conflict between rebels and Imperial Forces, the wipes between scenes, the fusion of futuristic technology and traditional mythology, and the famous opening crawl that begins each film.
The film has also been compared to The Wizard of Oz.
The influence of The Hidden Fortress can be seen in the relationship between C-3PO and R2-D2, which evolved from the two bickering peasants, Tahei and Matashichi, and a Japanese family crest seen in the earlier film is similar to the Imperial Crest.
Star Wars also borrows heavily from another Kurosawa film, Yojimbo (1961).
In both films, several men threaten the hero, bragging about how wanted they are by the authorities, and have an arm being cut off by a blade; Kuwabatake Sanjuro (played by Toshiro Mifune) is offered "twenty-five ryo now, twenty-five when you complete the mission", whereas Han Solo is offered "Two thousand now, plus fifteen when we reach Alderaan.
"
Its sequel Sanjuro (1962) also inspired the hiding-under-the-floor trick featured in the film.
Another source of influence was Lawrence of Arabia (1962), which inspired the film's visual approach, including long-lens desert shots.
There are also thematic parallels, including the freedom fight by a rebel army against an empire, and politicians who meddle behind the scenes.
Tatooine is similar to the desert planet of Arrakis from Frank Herbert's Dune series.
Arrakis is the only known source of a longevity spice; Star Wars makes references to spice in "the spice mines of Kessel", and a spice freighter.
Other similarities include those between Princess Leia and Princess Alia, and Jedi mind tricks and "The Voice", a controlling ability used by the Bene Gesserit.
In passing, Uncle Owen and Aunt Beru are "moisture farmers"; in Dune, dew collectors are used by Fremen to "provide a small but reliable source of water."
Frank Herbert reported that "David Lynch, [director of the 1984 film Dune] had trouble with the fact that Star Wars used up so much of Dune.
"
The pair found "sixteen points of identity" and they calculated that "the odds against coincidence produced a number larger than the number of stars in the universe.
"The
Death Star assault scene was modeled after the World War II film The Dam Busters (1955), in which Royal Air Force Lancaster bombers fly along heavily defended reservoirs and aim bouncing bombs at dams, in order to cripple the heavy industry of Germany's Ruhr region.
Some of the dialogue in The Dam Busters is repeated in the Star Wars climax; Gilbert Taylor also filmed the special effects sequences in The Dam Busters.
In addition, the sequence was partially inspired by the climax of the film 633 Squadron (1964), directed by Walter Grauman, in which RAF de Havilland Mosquitos attack a German heavy water plant by flying down a narrow fjord to drop special bombs at a precise point, while avoiding anti-aircraft guns and German fighters.
Clips from both films were included in Lucas's temporary dogfight footage version of the sequence.
There are also similarities in the Death Star trench sequence to the bridge attack scene in The Bridges at Toko-Ri.
The opening shot of Star Wars, in which a detailed spaceship fills the screen overhead, is a reference to the scene introducing the interplanetary spacecraft Discovery One in Stanley Kubrick's seminal 1968 film 2001: A Space Odyssey.
The earlier big-budget science fiction film influenced the look of Star Wars in many other ways, including the use of EVA pods and hexagonal corridors.
The Death Star has a docking bay reminiscent of the one on the orbiting space station in 2001.
Although golden and male, C-3PO was inspired by the silver female robot Maria, the Maschinenmensch from Fritz Lang's 1927 film Metropolis.

==
Marketing ==
While the film was in production, a logo was commissioned from Dan Perri, a title sequence designer who had worked on the titles for films such as The Exorcist (1973) and Taxi Driver (1976).
Perri devised a foreshortened STAR WARS logotype consisting of block-capital letters filled with stars and skewed towards a vanishing point.
This logo design was originally conceived to follow the same perspective as the film's opening crawl.
In the end, Perri's logo was not used for the film's opening title sequence, although it was used widely on pre-release print advertising and on cinema marquees.
The logotype eventually selected for on-screen use originated in a promotional brochure that was distributed by Fox to cinema owners in 1976.
This brochure was designed by Suzy Rice, a young art director at the Los Angeles advertising agency Seiniger Advertising.
On a visit to ILM in Van Nuys, Rice was instructed by Lucas to produce a logo that would intimidate the viewer, and he reportedly asked for the logo to appear "very fascist" in style.
Rice's response to her brief was to use an outlined, modified Helvetica Black.
After some feedback from Lucas, Rice decided to join the S and T of STAR and the R and S of WARS.
Lucas signed off on the brochure in between takes while filming inserts for the Mos Eisley Cantina scene.
Gary Kurtz was impressed with Rice's logo and selected it over Perri's design for the film's opening titles, after modifying the letter W to flatten the pointed tips originally designed by Rice.
This finalized the design of one of the most recognizable logos in cinema design, although Rice's contribution was not credited in the film.
For the US release in 1977, 20th Century-Fox commissioned a promotional film poster from the advertising agency Smolen, Smith and Connolly.
They used the freelance artist Tom Jung who was given the brief of "good over evil."
His poster, known as Style ‘A’, depicted Luke Skywalker standing in a heroic pose, brandishing a shining lightsaber above his head, with Princess Leia below him, and a large, ghostly image of Darth Vader's helmet looming behind them.
Some Fox executives considered this poster "too dark" and commissioned the Brothers Hildebrandt, a pair of well-known fantasy artists, to rework the poster for the UK release.
When the film opened in British theaters, the Hildebrandts' Style ‘B’ poster was used in cinema billboards.
Fox and Lucasfilm subsequently decided that they wanted to promote the new film with a less stylized and more realistic depiction of the lead characters.
Producer Gary Kurtz turned to the film poster artist Tom Chantrell, who was already well known for his prolific work for Hammer horror films, and commissioned a new version.
Two months after Star Wars opened, the Hildebrandts' poster was replaced by Chantrell's Style ‘C’ poster in UK cinemas.
Charles Lippincott was the marketing director for Star Wars.
As 20th Century-Fox gave little support for marketing beyond licensing T-shirts and posters, Lippincott was forced to look elsewhere.
He secured deals with Marvel Comics for a comic book adaptation, and with Del Rey Books for a novelization.
A fan of science fiction, he used his contacts to promote the film at the San Diego Comic-Con and elsewhere within science-fiction fandom.

==
Release ==
While initially being released only in a limited theatrical run, Star Wars was an unprecedented success for 20th Century-Fox, soon becoming a blockbuster hit and expanding to a much wider release.
It would eventually see many theatrical and home video re-releases.

===
Premiere and initial release ===
Worried that Star Wars would be beaten out by other summer films, such as Smokey and the Bandit, 20th Century-Fox moved the release date to May 25, the Wednesday before Memorial Day.
However, fewer than 40 theaters ordered the film to be shown.
In response, the studio demanded that theaters order Star Wars if they wanted the eagerly anticipated The Other Side of Midnight based on Sidney Sheldon's 1973 novel by the same name.

Star Wars debuted on Wednesday, May 25, 1977, in fewer than 32 theaters, and eight more on Thursday and Friday.
Kurtz said in 2002, "That would be laughable today.
"
It immediately broke box office records, effectively becoming one of the first blockbuster films, and Fox accelerated plans to broaden its release.
Lucas himself was not able to predict how successful Star Wars would be.
After visiting the set of the Steven Spielberg film Close Encounters of the Third Kind, Lucas was sure Close Encounters would outperform the yet-to-be-released Star Wars at the box office.
Spielberg disagreed, and believed Star Wars would be the bigger hit.
Lucas proposed they trade 2.5% of the profit on each other's films; Spielberg took the trade, and still receives 2.5% of the profits from Star Wars.
Amidst Fox pessimism, Lucas elected to forgo his option to an extra $500,000 fee for directing Star Wars, in exchange for releasing ownership of the merchandising and sequel rights for the movie to Fox.
The Other Side of Midnight was supposed to be the studio's big summer hit, while Lucas's movie was considered the "B track" for theater owners nationwide.
While Fox requested Mann's Chinese Theatre, the studio promised that the film needed only two weeks.

Fearing that the film would fail, Lucas had made plans to be in Hawaii with his wife Marcia.
Having forgotten that the film would open that day, he spent most of Wednesday in a sound studio in Los Angeles.
When Lucas went out for lunch with Marcia, they encountered a long line of people along the sidewalks leading to Mann's Chinese Theatre, waiting to see Star Wars.
He was still skeptical of the film's success, even with enthusiastic reports from Ladd and the studio.
While in Hawaii, it was not until he watched Walter Cronkite discuss the gigantic crowds for Star Wars on the CBS Evening News that Lucas realized he had become very wealthy.
Francis Ford Coppola, who needed money to finish Apocalypse Now, sent a telegram to Lucas's hotel asking for funding.
Even technical crew members, such as model makers, were asked for autographs, and cast members became instant household names; when Ford visited a record store to buy an album, enthusiastic fans tore half his shirt off.
The film was a huge success for 20th Century-Fox, and was credited for reinvigorating the company.
Within three weeks of the film's release, the studio's stock price had doubled to a record high.
Prior to 1977, 20th Century-Fox's greatest annual profits were $37 million, while in 1977, the company broke that record by posting a profit of $79 million.
Although the film's cultural neutrality helped it to gain international success, Ladd became anxious during the premiere in Japan.
After the screening, the audience was silent, leading him to fear that the film would be unsuccessful.
Ladd was reassured by his local contacts that this was a positive reaction considering that in Japan, silence was the greatest honor to a film, and the subsequent strong box office returns confirmed its popularity.
After two weeks William Friedkin's Sorcerer replaced Star Wars at Mann's Chinese Theatre because of contractual obligations; Mann Theatres moved the film to a less-prestigious location after quickly renovating it.
When Star Wars made an unprecedented second opening at Mann's Chinese Theatre on August 3, 1977, after Sorcerer failed, thousands of people attended a ceremony in which C-3PO, R2-D2 and Darth Vader placed their footprints in the theater's forecourt.
At that time Star Wars was playing in 1,096 theaters in the United States.
Approximately 60 theaters played the film continuously for over a year; in 1978, Lucasfilm distributed "Birthday Cake" posters to those theaters for special events on May 25, the one-year anniversary of the film's release.
Star Wars premiered in the UK on December 27, 1977.
News reports of the film's popularity in America caused long lines to form at the two London theaters that first offered the film; it became available in 12 large cities in January 1978, and other London theaters in February.

===
Theatrical re-releases ===
Star Wars was re-released theatrically in 1978, 1979, 1981 and 1982, with the subtitle Episode IV – A New Hope being added in 1981.
The film was digitally remastered with some altered scenes in 1997 for a theatrical rerelease, dubbed the "Special Edition."

Since its original release, the film has also been dubbed and subtitled into numerous languages.

In 2010, Lucas announced that all six previously released Star Wars films would be scanned and transferred to 3D for a theatrical release, but only 3D versions of the prequel trilogy were completed before the franchise was sold to Disney in 2012.

In 2013, Star Wars was dubbed into Navajo, making it the first major motion picture translated into a Native American language.

====
Inclusion of subtitles ====
The texts Episode IV and A New Hope were first published on a title page for the film's script in the 1979 book The Art of Star Wars, in what Kaminski calls "outright forgery", remarking that "the script itself wasn't even the authentic revised fourth draft, but more like a transcription of the finished film, edited and combined with the real fourth draft.
"
The title was changed when the film entered re-releases.
Official sources state that the change was made at the theatrical re-release of April 10
, 1981.The retronymic inclusion of subtitles brought the film into line with the introduction to its sequel, The Empire Strikes Back, which was reconcieved during rewrites as "Episode V" and eventually released as such in 1980.
Lucas claims this was intended from the beginning, and was only dropped to avoid confusing audiences: "
Star Wars was the fourth story in the saga and was to have been called 'Star Wars, Episode Four:
A New Hope'.
"
In 2014, Kurtz recalled they had toyed with the idea "of calling it Episode III, IV, or V.
" Hamill recalls having asked Lucas "Why are we doing episode four?"
and being answered that Lucas wanted "to give the audience a feeling that they'd missed something and that they were coming into the middle of this story" or that it was "the most commercial section" of the overriding story.
Kaminski, however, points out that all early drafts carry an "Episode One" subtitle, and that even early drafts of the sequel are called "Episode II."
====
Special Edition ====
After ILM used computer-generated effects for Steven Spielberg's 1993 film Jurassic Park, Lucas decided that digital technology had caught up to his "original vision" for Star Wars.
For the film's 20th anniversary in 1997, Star Wars was digitally remastered with some altered scenes and re-released to theaters, along with The Empire
Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi
, under the campaign title Star Wars Trilogy: Special Edition.
This version of the film runs 124 minutes.

The Special Edition contains visual shots and scenes that were unachievable in the original release due to financial, technological, and time constraints; one such scene involves a meeting between Han Solo and Jabba the Hutt.
The process of creating the new visual effects for Star Wars was featured in the documentary film, Special Effects:
Anything Can Happen, directed by Star Wars sound designer Ben Burtt.
Although most changes are minor or cosmetic in nature, many fans and critics believe that Lucas degraded the film with the additions.
A particularly controversial change in which a bounty hunter named Greedo shoots first when confronting Han Solo has inspired T-shirts bearing the phrase "Han Shot First.
"Star
Wars required extensive recovery of misplaced footage and restoration of the whole film before Lucas's Special Edition modifications could be attempted.
It was discovered that in addition to the negative motion picture stocks commonly used on feature films, Lucas had also used Color Reversal Internegative (CRI) film, a reversal stock subsequently discontinued by Kodak.
CRI proved to deteriorate faster than negative stocks did, although it theoretically was of higher quality, as it saved two generations (an interpositive followed by an internegative), where employed.
Because of this, the entire composited negative had to be disassembled, and the CRI portions cleaned separately from the negative portions.
Once the cleaning was complete, the film was scanned into the computer for restoration.
In many cases, entire scenes had to be reconstructed from their individual elements.
Digital compositing technology allowed the restorers to correct for problems such as misalignment of mattes and "blue-spill.
"In
1989
, the 1977 theatrical version of Star Wars was selected for preservation by the National Film Registry of the United States Library of Congress.
35mm reels of the 1997 Special Edition were initially presented for preservation because of the difficulty of transferring from the original prints, but it was later revealed that the Library possessed a copyright deposit print of the original theatrical release.
By 2015, this copy had been transferred to a 2K scan, now available to be viewed by appointment.

===
Home media ===
In the United States, France, West Germany, Italy and Japan, parts of or the whole film were released on Super 8.
The whole film was released for all these countries (including subtitled silent editions and an American Spanish-language edition), except for Italy, where the film (titled "Guerre stellari") was released by IE International as eight brief scenes: Battaglia spaziale ("Space battle", the Battle of Yavin), Duello col laser ("Duel with the laser", Obi-Wan and Darth Vader's duel), La cattura dell'astronave
("The capture of the spaceship"), La liberazione di Leia ("Leia's liberation", the adventure on the Death Star), Messaggio dallo spazio ("Message from space", Leia giving R2-D2 the plans), SOS nella galassia ("SOS in the galaxy") and Trappola mortale ("Deadly trap", the Falcon being captured by the Death Star).
A full Super 8 version of the film was only made available in Italy as a pirate six-reel set.
Star Wars debuted on Betamax, CED, LaserDisc, Video 2000, and VHS between the 1980s and 1990s by CBS/Fox Video.
The final issue of the original theatrical release (pre-Special Edition) to VHS format occurred in 1995, as part of "Last Chance to Own the Original" campaign, available as part of a trilogy set and as a standalone purchase.
The film was released for the first time on DVD on September 21, 2004, in a box set with The Empire Strikes Back, Return of the Jedi, and a bonus disc of supplementary material.
The films were digitally restored and remastered, and more changes were made by Lucas.
The DVD features a commentary track from Lucas, Ben Burtt, Dennis Muren, and Carrie Fisher.
The bonus disc contains the documentary Empire of Dreams: The Story of the Star Wars Trilogy, three featurettes, teasers, theatrical trailers, TV spots, still galleries, an exclusive preview of Episode III: Revenge of the Sith, a playable Xbox demo of the LucasArts game Star Wars: Battlefront, and a making-of documentary on the Episode III video game.
The set was reissued in December 2005 as part of a three-disc limited edition boxed set without the bonus disc.
The trilogy was re-released on separate two-disc limited edition DVD sets from September 12 to December 31, 2006, and again in a limited edition tin box set on November 4, 2008; the original versions of the films were added as bonus material.
The release was met with criticism as the unaltered versions were from the 1993 non-anamorphic LaserDisc masters and were not re-transferred using modern video standards.
The transfer led to problems with colors and digital image jarring.
All six Star Wars films were released by 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment on Blu-ray Disc on September 16, 2011 in three different editions, with A New Hope available in both a box set of the original trilogy and with all six films on Star Wars:
The Complete Saga, which includes nine discs and over 40 hours of special features.
The original theatrical versions of the films were not included in the box set.
New changes were made to the films, provoking mixed responses.
On April 7, 2015, Walt Disney Studios, 20th Century Fox, and Lucasfilm jointly announced the digital releases of the six released Star Wars films.
Fox released A New Hope for digital download on April 10, 2015.
In December 2016, Rogue One director Gareth Edwards revealed that Lucasfilm had recently completed a 4K restoration of Star Wars, but did not elaborate on whether the restored version was based on the 1977 original or a subsequent re-release.
Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment reissued the film on Blu-ray, DVD, and digital download on September 22, 2019.
Additionally, all six films were available for 4K HDR and Dolby Atmos streaming on Disney+ upon the service's launch on November 12, 2019.
This version of the film was released by Disney on 4K Ultra HD Blu-ray box set on March 31, 2020.

== Reception ==


===
Box office ===
Star Wars remains one of the most financially successful films of all time.
The film opened on a Wednesday in 32 theaters expanding to 43 screens on the Friday and earning $2,556,418 in its first six days to the end of the Memorial Day weekend ($10.8 million in 2019 dollars).
Per Variety's weekly box office charts, the film was number one at the US box office for its first three weeks.
It was replaced by The Deep but gradually added screens and returned to number one in its seventh week, building up to $7 million weekends as it entered wide release ($29.5 million in 2019 dollars) and remained number one for the next 15 weeks.
It replaced Jaws as the highest-earning film in North America just six months into release, eventually earning over $220 million during its initial theatrical run ($928 million in 2019 dollars).
Star Wars entered international release towards the end of the year, and in 1978 added the worldwide record to its domestic one, earning $410 million in total.
Its biggest international market was Japan, where it grossed $58.4 million.
On July 21, 1978 while still in current release in 38 theaters in the U.S., the film expanded into a 1,744 theater national saturation windup of release and set a new U.S. weekend record of $10,202,726.
The gross prior to the expansion was $221,280,994.
The expansion added a further $43,774,911 to take its gross to $265,055,905.
Reissues in 1979 ($22,455,262), 1981 ($17,247,363), and 1982 ($17,981,612) brought its cumulative gross in the U.S and Canada to $323 million, and extended its global earnings to $530 million.
The film remained the highest-grossing film of all time until E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial broke that record in 1983.The release of the Special Edition in 1997 was the highest-grossing reissue of all-time with a gross of $138.3 million, bringing its total gross in the United States and Canada to $460,998,007, reclaiming the all-time number one spot.
Internationally, the reissue grossed $117.2 million, with $26 million from the United Kingdom and $15 million from Japan.
In total, the film has grossed over $775 million worldwide.
Adjusted for inflation, it had earned over $2.5 billion worldwide at 2011 prices, which saw it ranked as the third-highest-grossing film at the time, according to Guinness World Records.
At the North American box office, it ranks second behind Gone with the Wind on the inflation-adjusted list.

===
Critical response ===
The film was met with critical acclaim upon its release.
In his 1977 review, Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times called the film "an out-of-body experience," compared its special effects to those of 2001: A Space Odyssey, and opined that the true strength of the film was its "pure narrative."
Vincent Canby of The New York Times called the film "the movie that's going to entertain a lot of contemporary folk who have a soft spot for the virtually ritualized manners of comic-book adventure" and "the most elaborate, most expensive, most beautiful movie serial ever made."
A.D. Murphy of Variety described the film as "magnificent" and said George Lucas had succeeded in his attempt to create the "biggest possible adventure fantasy" based on the serials and older action epics from his childhood.
Writing for The Washington Post, Gary Arnold gave the film a positive review, writing that the film "is a new classic in a rousing movie tradition: a space swashbuckler."
However, the film was not without its detractors: Pauline Kael of The New Yorker criticized Star Wars, stating that "there's no breather in the picture, no lyricism", and that it had no "emotional grip."
John Simon of New York magazine also panned the film and wrote, "Strip Star Wars of its often striking images and its highfalutin scientific jargon, and you get a story, characters, and dialogue of overwhelming banality."
Stanley Kauffmann, reviewing the film in The New Republic, opined that it "was made for those (particularly males) who carry a portable shrine within them of their adolescence, a chalice of a Self that was Better
Then, before the world's affairs or—in any complex way—sex intruded.
"When
Star Wars opened in the UK, stating that Lucas's earlier films were better, Derek Malcolm of The Guardian concluded that it "plays enough games to satisfy the most sophisticated."
The Daily Telegraph's science correspondent Adrian Berry said that Star Wars "is the best such film since 2001 and in certain respects it is one of the most exciting ever made."
He described the plot as "unpretentious and pleasantly devoid of any 'message.'"

A few critics found fault in the lack of representation of African Americans in the space fantasy, with a writer for New Journal and Guide calling it "one of the most racist movies ever produced", pointing out that "the force of evil ... is dressed in all black and has the voice of a black man."
Lucas felt hurt at the accusations.
The film continues to receive critical acclaim from modern critics.
The film review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes indicates a 92% approval rating based on 125 reviews with an overall rating of 8.81/10.
Its consensus states in summary, "A legendarily expansive and ambitious start to the sci-fi saga
, George Lucas opened our eyes to the possibilities of blockbuster filmmaking and things have never been the same."
Metacritic reports a weighted average score of 90 out of 100 based on 24 reviews, indicating "universal acclaim.
"
In his 1997 review of the film's 20th anniversary release, Michael Wilmington of the Chicago Tribune gave the film four out of four stars, saying, "A grandiose and violent epic with a simple and whimsical heart."
A San Francisco Chronicle staff member described the film as "a thrilling experience."

In 2001 Matt Ford of the BBC awarded the film five out of five stars and wrote, "Star Wars isn't the best film ever made, but it is universally loved."
CinemaScore reported that audiences for Star Wars's 1999 re-release gave the film a "A+" grade.
Gene Siskel, writing for the Chicago Tribune in 1999, said, "What places it a sizable cut above the routine is its spectacular visual effects, the best since Stanley Kubrick's 2001."
Andrew Collins of Empire magazine awarded the film five out of five and said, "Star Wars' timeless appeal lies in its easily identified, universal archetypes—goodies to root for, baddies to boo, a princess to be rescued and so on—and if it is most obviously dated to the 70s by the special effects, so be it."
In his 2009 review, Robert Hatch of The Nation called the film "an outrageously successful, what will be called a 'classic,' compilation of nonsense, largely derived but thoroughly reconditioned.
I doubt that anyone will ever match it, though the imitations must already be on the drawing boards.
"
In a more critical review, Jonathan Rosenbaum of the Chicago Reader stated, "None of these characters has any depth, and they're all treated like the fanciful props and settings."
Peter Keough of the Boston Phoenix said, "Star Wars is a junkyard of cinematic gimcracks not unlike the Jawas' heap of purloined, discarded, barely functioning droids."
===
Accolades ===
The film garnered numerous accolades after its release.
Star Wars won six competitive Academy Awards at the 50th Academy Awards: Best Art Direction, Best Costume Design, Best Film Editing, Best Original Score, Best Sound and Best Visual Effects.
A Special Achievement for Sound Effects Editing went to sound designer Ben Burtt and a Scientific and Engineering Award went to John Dykstra for the development of the Dykstraflex Camera (shared with Alvah J. Miller and Jerry Jeffress, who were both granted for the engineering of the Electronic Motion Control System).
Additional nominations included Alec Guinness for Best Actor in a Supporting Role, which went to Jason Robards for Julia and George Lucas for Best Original Screenplay, Best Director, and Best Picture, which were instead awarded to Woody Allen's Annie Hall.
At the 35th Golden Globe Awards, the film was nominated for Best Motion Picture – Drama, Best Director, Best Supporting Actor (Alec Guinness), and it won the award for Best Score.
It received six British Academy Film Awards nominations: Best Film, Best Editing, Best Costume Design, Best Production/Art Design, Best Sound, and Best Score; the film won in the latter two categories.
John Williams's soundtrack album won the Grammy Award for Best Album of Original Score for a Motion Picture or Television Program, and the film attained the Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation.
The film also received twelve nominations at the Saturn Awards, winning nine:
Best Science Fiction Film, Best Direction and Best Writing for George Lucas, Best Supporting Actor for Alec Guinness, Best Music for John Williams, Best Costume for John Mollo, Best Make-up for Rick Baker and Stuart Freeborn, Best Special Effects for John Dykstra and John Stears, and Outstanding Editing for Paul Hirsch, Marcia Lucas and Richard Chew.
==
Legacy ==
Star Wars launched the careers of many of the film's actors: Mark Hamill (Luke Skywalker), Harrison Ford (Han Solo), Carrie Fisher (Princess Leia), Peter Mayhew (Chewbacca), Anthony Daniels (C-3PO), and James Earl Jones (voice of Darth Vader).
Ford, who subsequently starred in the Indiana Jones series (1981–present), Blade Runner (1982), and Witness (1985) after working on the film, told the Daily Mirror that Star Wars "boosted my career", and said, "I think the great luck of my career is that I've made these family movies which are introduced to succeeding generations of kids by their families at the time it seems appropriate.
"The
film has spawned a series of films consisting of three trilogies (including the original film), anthology films and an extensive media franchise called the Star Wars expanded universe including books, television series, computer and video games, and comic books.
The original Star Wars trilogy is considered one of the best film trilogies in history.
All of the main films have been box office successes, with the overall box office revenue generated by the Star Wars films (including the animated The Clone Wars) totaling over $10.1 billion, making it the second highest-grossing film series as of 2019.The film also spawned the Star Wars Holiday Special, which debuted on CBS on November 17, 1978 and is often considered a failure; Lucas himself disowned it.
The special has never been aired after its original broadcast, and it has never been officially released on home video.
However, many bootleg copies exist, and the special has consequently become something of an underground legend.
A radio drama adaptation of the film was broadcast on the American National Public Radio network in 1981.
The adaptation was written by Brian Daley and directed by John Madden, and was produced with cooperation from George Lucas, who donated the rights to NPR.
John Williams's music and Ben Burtt's sound design were retained for the show, and Mark Hamill (Luke Skywalker) and Anthony Daniels (C-3PO) reprised their roles.
The radio drama narrative began with a version of the backstory to the film which relates Princess Leia's acquisition of the secret Death Star plans.
It also featured scenes not seen in the final cut of the film, such as Luke Skywalker's observation of the space battle above Tatooine through binoculars, a skyhopper race, and Darth Vader's interrogation of Princess Leia.
The radio version was originally considered to be part of the official Star Wars canon, but has since been supplanted by revised canonical narratives.

===
In popular culture ===
Star Wars and its ensuing film installments have been explicitly referenced and satirized across a wide range of media.
Hardware Wars, released in 1978, was one of the first fan films to parody Star Wars.
It received positive critical reaction, went to earn over $1 million, and is one of Lucas's favorite Star Wars spoofs.
Writing for The New York Times, Frank DeCaro said, "Star Wars littered pop culture of the late 1970s with a galaxy of space junk."
He cited Quark (a short-lived 1977 sitcom that parodies the science fiction genre) and Donny & Marie (a 1970s variety show that produced a 10-minute musical adaptation of Star Wars guest starring Daniels and Mayhew) as "television's two most infamous examples."
Mel Brooks's Spaceballs, a satirical comic science fiction parody, was released in 1987 to mixed reviews.
Lucas permitted Brooks to make a spoof of the film under "one incredibly big restriction: no action figures.
"Contemporary animated comedy TV series Family Guy, Robot Chicken, and
The Simpsons have produced episodes satirizing the film series.
Star Wars, together with Lucas, is the subject of the 2010 documentary film
The People vs. George Lucas that details the issues of filmmaking and fanaticism pertaining to the film franchise and its creator.
Many elements of the film have also endured presence in popular culture.
The iconic weapon of choice of the Jedi, the lightsaber, was voted as the most popular weapon in film history in a survey of approximately 2,000 film fans.
Characters such as Darth Vader, Han Solo, and Yoda have become iconic, and all three were named in the top twenty of the British Film Institute's "Best Sci-Fi Characters of All-Time" list.
The expressions "Evil empire" and "May the Force be with you" have become part of the popular lexicon.
A pun on the latter phrase has led to May 4 being regarded by many fans of the franchise as an unofficial Star Wars Day.
To commemorate the film's 30th anniversary in May 2007, the United States Postal Service issued a set of 15 stamps depicting the characters of the franchise.
Approximately 400 mailboxes across the country were also designed to look like R2-D2.
===
Cinematic influence ===
Film critic Roger Ebert wrote in his book The Great Movies, "Like The Birth of a Nation and Citizen Kane, Star Wars was a technical watershed that influenced many of the movies that came after.
"
It began a new generation of special effects and high-energy motion pictures.
The film was one of the first films to link genres together to invent a new, high-concept genre for filmmakers to build upon.
Finally, along with Steven Spielberg's Jaws, it shifted the film industry's focus away from personal filmmaking of the 1970s and towards fast-paced, big-budget blockbusters for younger audiences.
Filmmakers who have said to have been influenced by Star Wars include James Cameron, J.J. Abrams, Damon Lindelof, Dean Devlin, Gareth Edwards, Roland Emmerich, John Lasseter, David Fincher, Peter Jackson, Joss Whedon, Christopher Nolan, Ridley Scott, John Singleton, and Kevin Smith.
Scott, Cameron, and Jackson were influenced by Lucas's concept of the "used future" (where vehicles and culture are obviously dated) and extended the concept for their films, such as Scott's science fiction films Alien (1979) and Blade Runner (1982), Cameron's acclaimed sequel Aliens (1986) and his earlier breakthrough film
The Terminator (1984).
Jackson used the concept for his production of The Lord of the Rings trilogy to add a sense of realism and believability.
Christopher Nolan cited Star Wars as an influence when making the 2010 blockbuster film, Inception.
Some critics have blamed Star Wars, as well as Jaws, for ruining Hollywood by shifting its focus from "sophisticated" films such as The Godfather, Taxi Driver, and Annie Hall to films about spectacle and juvenile fantasy.
One such critic, Peter Biskind, complained, "When all was said and done, Lucas and Spielberg returned the 1970s audience, grown sophisticated on a diet of European and New Hollywood films, to the simplicities of the pre-1960s Golden Age of movies...
They marched backward through the looking-glass.
"
In an opposing view, Tom Shone wrote that through Star Wars and Jaws, Lucas and Spielberg "didn't betray cinema at all: they plugged it back into the grid, returning the medium to its roots as a carnival sideshow, a magic act, one big special effect", which was "a kind of rebirth."
===
Recognition ===
In its May 30, 1977 issue, the film's year of release, Time magazine named Star Wars the "Movie of the Year.
"
The publication said it was a "big early supporter" of the vision which would become Star Wars.
In an article intended for the cover of the issue, Time's Gerald Clarke wrote that Star Wars is "a grand and glorious film that may well be the smash hit of 1977, and certainly is the best movie of the year so far.
The result is a remarkable confection: a subliminal history of the movies, wrapped in a riveting tale of suspense and adventure, ornamented with some of the most ingenious special effects ever contrived for film.
"
Each of the subsequent films of the Star Wars saga has appeared on the magazine's cover.

Star Wars was voted the second most popular film by Americans in a 2008 nationwide poll conducted by the market research firm, Harris Interactive.
Star Wars has also been featured in several high-profile audience polls: in 1997, it ranked as the 10th Greatest American Film on the Los Angeles Daily News Readers' Poll; in 2002, the film and its sequel
The Empire Strikes Back were voted as the greatest films ever made in Channel 4's 100 Greatest Films poll; in 2011, it ranked as Best Sci-Fi Film on Best in Film:
The Greatest Movies of Our Time, a primetime special aired by ABC that counted down the best films as chosen by fans, based on results of a poll conducted by ABC and People magazine; in 2014 the film placed 11th in a poll undertaken by The Hollywood Reporter, which balloted every studio, agency, publicity firm, and production house in the Hollywood region.
Reputable publications also have included Star Wars in their best films lists: in 2008, Empire magazine ranked Star Wars at No.
22 on its list of the "500 Greatest Movies of All Time"; in 2010, the film ranked among the "All-Time 100" list of the greatest films as chosen by Time magazine film critic Richard Schickel; the film was also placed on a similar list created by The New York Times, "The New York Times Guide to the Best 1,000 Movies
Ever Made"; in 2012, the film was included in Sight & Sound's prestigious decennial critics poll "Critics' Top 250 Films", ranking at 171st on the list, and in their directors poll at 224th.
Lucas's original screenplay was selected by the Writers Guild of America as the 68th greatest of all time.
In 1989, the United States Library of Congress named Star Wars among its first selections to the National Film Registry as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant"; at the time, it was the most recent film to be selected and it was the only film from the 1970s to be chosen.
Although Lucas declined to provide the Library with a workable copy of the original film upon request (instead offering the Special Edition), a viewable scan was made of the original copyright deposit print.
The soundtrack was added to the United States National Recording Registry 15 years later (in 2004).
The lack of a commercially available version of the 1977 original theatrical edit of the film since early '80s VHS releases has spawned numerous restorations by disgruntled fans over the years, such as Harmy's Despecialized Edition.
In addition to the film's multiple awards and nominations, Star Wars has also been recognized by the American Film Institute on several of its lists.
The film ranks first on 100 Years of Film Scores, second on Top 10 Sci-Fi Films, 15th on 100 Years...
100 Movies (ranked 13th on the updated 10th anniversary edition), 27th on 100 Years...100 Thrills, and 39th on 100 Years...
100 Cheers.
In addition, the quote "May the Force be with you" is ranked eighth on 100 Years...
100 Movie Quotes, and Han Solo and Obi-Wan Kenobi are ranked as the 14th and 37th greatest heroes respectively on 100 Years...
100 Heroes & Villains.
==
Merchandising ==
Little Star Wars merchandise was available for several months after the film's debut, as only Kenner Products had accepted marketing director Charles Lippincott's licensing offers.
Kenner responded to the sudden demand for toys by selling boxed vouchers in its "empty box" Christmas campaign.
Television commercials told children and parents that vouchers within a "Star Wars Early Bird Certificate Package" could be redeemed for four action figures between February and June 1978.
Jay West of the Los Angeles Times said that the boxes in the campaign "became the most coveted empty box[es] in the history of retail.
"
In 2012, the Star Wars action figures were inducted into the National Toy Hall of Fame.
The novelization of the film was published as Star Wars: From the Adventures of Luke Skywalker in December 1976, six months before the film was released.
The credited author was George Lucas, but the book was revealed to have been ghostwritten by Alan Dean Foster.
Marketing director Charles Lippincott secured the deal with Del Rey Books to publish the novelization in November 1976.
By February 1977, a half million copies had been sold.
Foster also wrote the sequel novel Splinter of the Mind's Eye (1978) to be adapted as a low-budget film if Star Wars was not a financial success.
Marvel Comics also adapted the film as the first six issues of its licensed Star Wars comic book, with the first issue sold in April 1977.
Roy Thomas was the writer and Howard Chaykin
was the artist of the adaptation.
Like the novelization, it contained certain elements, such as the scene with Luke and Biggs, that appeared in the screenplay but not in the finished film.
The series was so successful that, according to Jim Shooter, it "single-handedly saved Marvel.
"
In 2013, Dark Horse Comics published a comic adaption of the original screenplay's plot.
Lucasfilm adapted the story for a children's book-and-record set.
Released in 1979, the 24-page Star Wars read-along book was accompanied by a 33⅓ rpm 7-inch phonograph record.
Each page of the book contained a cropped frame from the movie with an abridged and condensed version of the story.
The record was produced by Buena Vista Records, and its content was copyrighted by Black Falcon, Ltd., a subsidiary of Lucasfilm "formed to handle the merchandising for Star Wars."
The Story of Star Wars was a 1977 record album presenting an abridged version of the events depicted in Star Wars, using dialogue and sound effects from the original film.
The recording was produced by George Lucas and Alan Livingston, and was narrated by Roscoe Lee Browne.
The script was adapted by E. Jack Kaplan and Cheryl Gard.
An audio CD boxed set of the Star Wars radio series was released in 1993, containing the original 1981 radio drama along with the radio adaptations of the sequels
, The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi.

==
Sequels ==
A sequel
, The Empire Strikes Back, was released in 1980.
In 1983, the final installment of the trilogy, Return of the Jedi, was released.
A prequel trilogy was released between 1999 and 2005, and following Disney's acquisition of Lucasfilm, a sequel trilogy was released between 2015 and 2019.
Spin-off films Rogue One and Solo
: A Star Wars Story are set before and explore the backstory to the original film.

==
See also ==
List of films considered the best
List of films featuring extraterrestrials
List of films featuring space stations


==
References ==
Footnotes
Citations


===
Sources ===


==
Further reading ==
Paul Duncan (2020): The Star Wars Archives.
1977–1983, Taschen GmbH
; Anniversary edition, ISBN 978-3836581172
George Lucas (Alan Dean Foster), Donald F. Glut & James Kahn (2017): Star Wars:
Original Trilogy (Novelizations), Arrow, ISBN 978-1784759384
J. W. Rinzler (2007).
The Making of Star Wars: The Definitive Story Behind the Original Film, Quarto Publishing, ISBN 978-1781311905
Bailey, T. J. (2005).
Devising a Dream:
A Book of Star Wars Facts and Production Timeline.
Louisville, KY:
Wasteland Press.
ISBN 1-933265-55-8.

Blackman, W. Haden (2004).
The New Essential Guide to Weapons and Technology, Revised Edition (Star Wars).
New York: Del Rey.
ISBN 0-345-44903-7.

Steven A. Galipeau (2001).
The Journey of Luke Skywalker:
An Analysis of Modern Myth and Symbol, Open Court, ISBN
978-0812694321
Sansweet, Stephen (1992).
Star Wars:
From Concept to Screen to Collectible.
San Francisco:
Chronicle Books.
ISBN 0-8118-0101-2.
==
External links ==
Star Wars essay [1] by Matt Zoller Seitz at National Film Registry
Star Wars essay
[2] by Daniel Eagan in America's Film Legacy:
The Authoritative Guide to the Landmark Movies in the National Film Registry, A&C Black, 2010 ISBN 0826429777,
pages 740 & 741
Official website at StarWars.com
Official website at Lucasfilm.com
Star Wars at AllMovie
Star Wars at the American Film Institute Catalog
Star Wars, Episode IV:
A New Hope (1977) at Filmsite.org
Star Wars at IMDb
Star Wars at the TCM Movie Database
Star Wars:
Episode IV
A New Hope on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
The Galactic Republic, often referred to as simply the Republic, is an interstellar state depicted in the fictional Star Wars universe, where it existed prior to the establishment of the Galactic Empire.
The Republic is most prominently portrayed in the prequel trilogy of films in the Star Wars franchise.
In the original trilogy, set later in time, it is referred to as the Old Republic.

The Republic is portrayed as a democratic constitutional republic that has sustained itself peacefully for over twenty-five thousand years, but is tied up in layers of bureaucracy.
It is mainly overseen by the Senate, a body in the Legislative Branch of the Republic government.
It is protected by the Jedi Order, the guardians of peace and justice throughout the Star Wars galaxy.
After the end of the Galactic Empire, the New Republic was founded.
It was enforced by the original Rebellion, eventually known as the New Republic Military.
The New Republic is depicted in the new Star Wars series, The Mandalorian.
The New Republic is eventually destroyed by the First Order, under Supreme Leader Snoke's direction.

==
The Old Republic ==
According to the large body of films and other fiction that belong to the Star Wars franchise, the Republic is formed 25,000 years before the events of Star Wars when the first "Galactic Constitution" is signed on Coruscant, after the Corellian Hyperdrive connects many worlds in the Core.
The Republic is made up of several hundred thousands of worlds, and each planet or system has representation in the Republic Senate, which comprises most of the Republic Legislative Branch and the government itself.
It starts off merely as an economic and protective alliance, mainly among the Core worlds.
It eventually expands to the Colonies and other outlying worlds and regions, becoming a superpower rather than an alliance, and it becomes the central government for the galaxy.

As the Republic expands, it comes into contact with the slave empire of Zygerria.
Because slavery is disallowed in the Republic, it dislikes the Empire, as slavery is central to the Empire's political and economic system; accordingly, the Empire refuses to become part of the Republic.
The Republic and Jedi declare war on the Empire and win.
The Empire is reduced to a small no-harm alliance on Zygerria.

The Sith (which formed in the Republic's early years) returns to their original strength and invade Malachor.
The first Sith War begins, which leads to the demise of the first Republic.
The power of the new Sith Empire increases as the Republic's decreases.
The Republic and Jedi forces fail to keep the Empire's Forces out of Republic Space.
Soon, the Sith become a second superpower.
Around this time, an ancestor of Pre Vizsla steals the darksaber from the Jedi Temple.
Around 1000 years prior to Star Wars, the Dark Age begins and the Republic finally collapses.
Right before the collapse, though, the Liberation of Coruscant occurs, and the Empire collapses.
Soon the Republic reforms and demilitarizes at the Ruusan Reformation, shortly after the Seventh Battle of Ruusan.

The multimedia project
Star Wars:
The High Republic depicts the galaxy 200 years before The Phantom Menace.
The Republic puts a strong magnetic field on its neighbouring worlds rather than conquering them by force.
This means the Republic expands slowly.
The Republic finally takes control of the Mid Rim.

Power blocs form out of the Republic, but the Jedi keep order.
The Republic becomes peaceful but corrupt, and a Core-Rim distrust forms.
When Supreme Chancellor Finis Valorum comes to power, a standoff between the Trade Federation and the Republic leads to the Invasion of Naboo.

==
Galactic senate and military ==
The Republic begins as a mutual protection and economic alliance among a number of planets in the Core.
Each member world or system chooses a Senator to represent them in the Galactic Senate, the main body of the legislative branch of the government.
Senators are ambassadors of their homeworlds or systems.
Member worlds and systems maintain their governments and societies as long as it does not defy any central and core Republican laws.
There are a wide variety of different local governments along the political spectrum: from monarchies to republics to hive-like communes.

When the Republic's power and influence expand, many new areas of the galaxy are incorporated into the Republic.
The Core and Colonies are the base of the Galactic Republic.
A reorganization of senatorial representation occurs 1,000 years prior to Star Wars during the Ruusan Reformation.
The most common organization for these new territories is to group regions into Sectors of about 50 inhabited worlds.
Each sector is represented by a Senatorial Delegation.
When the number of sectors becomes too large, sectors are organized into roughly a thousand regions, each represented by one delegation to the Senate.

The Senate serves as the unicameral main body of the legislative branch, but has immense power over the entire Galactic Republic.
The capital of the Republic, which contains the most political power and wealth, is Coruscant.

Inside the Senate Building, there is an area in which the Senate debates, casts votes, and makes or passes bills.
It contains 1,024 floating platforms, each of which contain a senator and his or her aides.
Each platform in the senate represents a "sector" of the galaxy.
A few platforms represent individual worlds of high importance, or worlds bringing special pleas to the Senate.
Some represent special interest groups such as the Trade Federation, and other companies, corporations, and industries.
Each senatorial delegation has one vote.

The members of the Senate elect a Supreme Chancellor from among their ranks who serves as the Senate's presiding officer and as the Republic's de facto leader.
The Chancellor is assisted by the Vice Chair, who is presumably elected in the same manner as the Chancellor; the same Vice Chair is present throughout the entire prequel trilogy.
The Senate follows pseudo-parliamentary rules.
Supreme Chancellor Finis Valorum was forced out of office by the Senate in a motion of no confidence, introduced by Queen Padmé Amidala of Naboo, for example.

Senators receive one vote in all matters, procedural and substantive.
The Chancellor is elected from within the Senate for a set term.
The Senate gives the Chancellor emergency powers in times of crisis and removes him from office when necessary.
The assembly is in turn divided into individual committees, each specializing in specific fields of government administration, and which were responsible for creating legislation to be reviewed by the full assembly.
The Senate has some form of judicial power as well, although the Republic has a judicial branch, in which the Supreme Court was the main body.

The main functions of the Senate are to mediate disputes between members, provide for the common defense, create and pass laws into effect that would benefit most of the Republic, and regulate inter-system trade.
The Jedi Order, although technically not officially part of the Republic, are considered the defenders of the general Republic.
The Republic often orders the Jedi to specific areas that require assistance.
In this way, they are eventually the unofficial police force of the Republic.
They become representatives of the Senate as well, to some extent.

Despite the seemingly organized structure of the Republic, the waning years of the Republic are a time of corruption and great social injustice.
The Senate becomes divided between those who genuinely wish to uphold the values and ideals of the Republic and those who wish to further their own goals.
Following a series of weak and ineffectual Chancellors, there is a crisis involving the invasion of Naboo by the Trade Federation over a tariff passed by the Senate.

After Senator Palpatine of Naboo becomes Chancellor, he increases the power of the office, from acting as commander-in-chief of the Grand Army of the Republic, or the Republic Military, to the institution of his personal bodyguard organization, the Red Guard.
The Office of the Supreme Chancellor is given power equaling that of the Senate.
The Galactic Senate also meets less often, as the Chancellor is voted more emergency powers to act on his own during the time of crisis.

Eventually, many Outer Rim planets and companies leave the Republic due to the amount of corruption and unfair treatment to Outer Rim worlds.
Together, they form a rebellion known as the Confederacy of Independent Systems, almost exclusively referred to in the films as the Separatists.
Some large industrial companies, including the Trade Federation, side with the Separatists, providing them with their military and its resources.

===
Galactic politicians ===
Politicians include Senators, the Supreme Chancellor, the Vice Chair of the Senate, the Administrative Aide, various Representatives from systems, and to an unofficial extent, the members of the Jedi Council.
Jedi Council members hold special status as they appear to have the ability to watch Senate meetings and advise such Senators on various matters.
The Jedi order protects these people.

===
Military ===
While the Republic had an Army and Navy for thousands of years, after the Rusaan Reformations, the Republic does not maintain a military except for a small force known as the Judicial Forces.

== Palpatine and the Jedi ==
The Jedi with the most authority served on the Jedi High Council, among whom Yoda and Mace Windu act as de facto leaders at the height of the Republic.
Although the Senate holds some degree of political authority over the Jedi, very little pressure was ever put on the Council before Palpatine took office and demanded that Anakin Skywalker become a member of the Council in Star Wars:
Episode III - Revenge of the Sith, despite the misgivings of the Jedi.
While the Council allowed Anakin to sit among them, they did not grant him the status of Jedi Master.

==
The Republic in the Great Galactic War (Clone War) ==
Several trade organizations represented in the Senate, such as the Trade Federation and Commerce Guild, keep armies of droids to protect their profits and occasionally take advantage of this, such as when the Trade Federation invade and occupy Naboo.
Individual sectors also maintain their own security forces, such as Naboo Security Force or the CorSec from Corellia, and these are sometimes used to combat small threats.
However, there is no centralized and official military of the Republic.
The Trade Federation and other cartels within the Republic desire that the Republic government lack significant central military power.
===
The Clone Wars ===
The Clone Wars changes all this.
The threat of the Confederacy of Independent Systems (CIS) poses a huge threat to the Republic after some of the galaxy's large companies ally with it.
A Military Creation Act is proposed, strongly opposed by many of the Republic's pacifist leaders, such as Padmé Amidala, the Queen of Naboo, who fear the possibility of war.
But most of the Senate supports a permanent, official, and central military.
Supporters of the Act include Orn Free Taa of Ryloth and Ask Aak of Malastare.

However, a Clone Army had already been created in secret on the planet Kamino on the edge of the galaxy ten years earlier, commissioned by Master Sifo-Dyas in secret, a former Jedi perceiving chaos in the galaxy.
When it becomes clear the Confederacy has no intention of negotiating, the Republic quickly accepts the Army made for them, and it is  dubbed the Grand Army of the Republic.

====
The Republic's offensive ====
Despite the high quality of their armaments and cloned troops, the Republic's war effort is initially hindered because most of the major industrial companies in the Galaxy have, under the aegis of the Techno Union, sided with the Confederacy.
Eventually, though, the Republic becomes a humongous superpower not only economically but also militarily.
The rapid militarization of the Republic during the Clone Wars, overseen by Supreme Chancellor Palpatine, has far reaching effects.
The Confederacy wins most battles in the first year of the Clone Wars.
During the second and middle year of the Clone Wars however, the Republic defends itself from Confederate attacks and retaliates with its own assaults, many of which are successful.
During the third and final year of the Clone Wars, the Republic wins many offensive battles in the Mid Rim and pushes the Confederate forces back to the Outer Rim with its "Outer Rim Sieges" campaign.

==
End of the Republic ==
During the Clone Wars, the Senate increasingly grants enormous amounts of power to Palpatine, who is the Commander-in-Chief.
Such actions are justified in the name of security and are considered a perfectly reasonable way to increase the wartime government's efficiency.
Eventually, Palpatine gains enough political power that he and his office are equal to the Senate.

Tension between Palpatine and the Jedi grow as the war progresses.
Many members of the Jedi Council remain skeptical of Palpatine's growing power.
In time, the Jedi believe that Palpatine will not surrender his emergency powers and his long overdue position by the end of the war.
This suspicion is also shared by some senators, including Padmé Amidala of Naboo, Bail Organa of Alderaan, and Mon Mothma of Chandrila.

After the death of Separatist leaders Count Dooku, who was the Head of State, and General Grievous, who was the Commander of the Separatist Army, and the discovery that Palpatine is actually Darth Sidious, the Sith Lord behind the war, the Jedi activate their contingency plans.

=== Order 66 ===
The Sith are the ancient enemy of the Jedi and were thought to have been destroyed many years ago.
A small group of experienced Jedi led by Mace Windu fail to arrest Palpatine for treason when Anakin Skywalker pledges himself to the dark side.
Shortly afterwards, Palpatine secretly orders the clones to exterminate the Jedi Order.
Because of control chips implanted inside the clones' heads, the clones are forced to slaughter the Jedi leaders in what would later become known as the Jedi Purge.
The Jedi padawans remaining on Coruscant are eliminated by Darth Vader, formerly known as Anakin Skywalker, and his personal battalion.
The clones, at the same time, start a war against the Confederacy and the droids.

===
A new empire ===
As the Clone Wars enter its final year, Palpatine's once near-unanimous support begins to falter.
As depicted in the Star Wars: Episode III – Revenge of the Sith novelization and deleted scenes from the film itself, a bloc of senators began to emerge, even before the Clone Wars end, who oppose Palpatine's authoritarian rule and resent his treatment of the Jedi and other opponents.
This bloc, originally led by influential politicians such as Bail Organa, Mon Mothma, and later by Bail's adopted daughter Princess Leia Organa, eventually become the political voice of the emerging Rebel Alliance.

At the conclusion of the Clone Wars, Palpatine addresses the Senate.
He relates the story of an unsuccessful "assassination attempt" on his life by the Jedi.
Claiming that it is a "rebellion" and that their next move would be to kill all the Senators, he declares the order to be enemies of the Republic.
Palpatine announces that the Galactic Republic will be reorganized into the Galactic Empire, and he will be the emperor for life.
Deluded by Palpatine's charisma and skill (and perhaps also by his considerable dark side power), the majority of the Senate cheer him on loudly in approval.

The official continuation of the Galactic Republic is the Galactic Empire, which is fueled by cruelty and fear.

==
The New Republic ==
The New Republic is a restoration of the Galactic Republic, a democratic state that governed the galaxy for a thousand years until being reorganized into the Galactic Empire by Palpatine.

It is first portrayed onscreen in Star Wars:
The Force Awakens (2015), where it is depicted as the ruling government of the galaxy and primary target of the First Order, a military power that seeks to restore the Galactic Empire.

It was destroyed 30 years after Return of the Jedi (1983) by the First Order and its Starkiller Base when Hosnian Prime was destroyed.

In literary fiction, The New Republic debuted in the 1991 Star Wars Legends novel, Heir to the Empire, by author Timothy Zahn.
===
New Republic appearances ===
Star Wars:
The Force Awakens (2015)
The Mandalorian (2019–present)
Star Wars: Battlefront II
(2017)
Star Wars: Squadrons (2020)


==
Reception and analysis ==
The story of the Galactic Republic's rise, fall and resurrection have been compared to those of the real-world Roman Republic and Weimar Germany.
From the storytelling perspective, the story of its "fall and redemption" has also been compared to that of Anakin Skywalker.

==
Appearances ==
Star Wars:
The Phantom Menace (1999)
Star Wars:
Attack of the Clones (2002)
Star Wars: Revenge of the Sith (2005)
Star Wars: The Clone Wars (Movie) (2008)
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars (2008−2020)


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Galactic Republic in the StarWars.com Databank
Galactic Republic on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
The Star Wars prequel trilogy, colloquially referred to as the prequels, is a series of epic space-opera films written and directed by George Lucas.
It was produced by Lucasfilm Ltd. and distributed by 20th Century Fox.
The trilogy was released from 1999 to 2005 and is set before the original Star Wars trilogy (1977–83), making it the first act of the Skywalker saga, despite being the second released.
Lucas had planned a prequel trilogy (as well as a sequel trilogy) before the release of the original film, but halted major Star Wars films beyond the original trilogy by 1981.
With the subsequent advances of computer-generated imagery, Lucas revived plans for the prequels by the early 1990s.
The trilogy marked Lucas's return to directing after a 22-year hiatus following the original Star Wars in 1977.

The trilogy consists of Episode I – The Phantom Menace (1999), Episode II – Attack of the Clones (2002), and Episode III – Revenge of the Sith (2005).
The films follow the training of the powerful youth Anakin Skywalker (the father of the original trilogy protagonists Luke Skywalker and Leia Organa) as a Jedi under the tutelage of Jedi Masters Obi-Wan Kenobi and Yoda, his fall to the dark side of the Force and birth as Darth Vader.
The trilogy also depicts the corruption of the Galactic Republic, the annihilation of the Jedi Order, and rise of the Empire under Sith Lord Darth Sidious.
The first two films received mixed reviews, while the third's reception was more positive.

==
Background ==
According to original trilogy producer Gary Kurtz, loose plans for a prequel trilogy were developed during the outlining of the original two films.
In 1980, Lucas confirmed that he had the nine-film series plotted, but due to the stress of producing the original trilogy and pressure from his wife to settle down, he had decided to cancel further sequels by 1981.

However, technical advances in the late 1980s and early 1990s, including the ability to create computer-generated imagery (CGI), inspired Lucas to consider that it might be possible to revisit his saga.
In 1989, Lucas stated that the prequel trilogy would be "unbelievably expensive."
After viewing an early CGI test created by Industrial Light & Magic for Jurassic Park, Lucas said:

We did a test for Steven Spielberg; and when we put them up on the screen I had tears in my eyes.
It was like one of those moments in history, like the invention of the lightbulb or the first telephone call.
A major gap had been crossed and things were never going to be the same.

In 1992, Lucas acknowledged that he had plans to create the prequel trilogy in the Lucasfilm Fan Club magazine, and announced this to Variety in late 1993.
Producer Rick McCallum reached out to Frank Darabont, who had previously written The Young Indiana Jones Chronicles and The Shawshank Redemption, for possible future writing duties.
He was considered until at least 1995, but as time went on, Lucas continued writing the screenplays himself.
Before Lucas chose to direct the prequels, Return of the Jedi director Richard Marquand expressed interest on directing one of the prequel films, up until his death in 1987.
The popularity of the franchise had been prolonged by the Star Wars Expanded Universe, so that it still had a large audience.
A theatrical rerelease of the original trilogy in 1997 'updated' the 20-year-old films with the style of CGI envisioned for the new episodes.

== Films ==
Having been significantly anticipated by fans, Star Wars:
Episode
I –
The Phantom Menace was released on May 19, 1999.
It sees the Jedi coming into contact with the young Anakin Skywalker and the corruption of the Galactic Senate by Palpatine (Darth Sidious).
Episode II –
Attack of the Clones was released on May 16, 2002.
The story jumps ahead 10 years and finds Anakin—now a Jedi apprentice of Obi-Wan Kenobi—pursuing a forbidden romance, as well as the outbreak of the Clone Wars.
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith, the first PG-13 film in the franchise, was released on May 19, 2005.
It depicts Anakin's fall to the dark side of the Force and his rebirth as Darth Vader.

===
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace ===
32 years before the events of the original film, two Jedi Knights—Qui-Gon Jinn and his apprentice Obi-Wan Kenobi—discover that the corrupt Trade Federation has formed a blockade around the planet Naboo.
Naboo's senator Palpatine—secretly the Sith Lord Darth Sidious—has covertly engineered the blockade as a pretext to become Supreme Chancellor of the Galactic Republic.
With the help of Naboo's queen, Padmé Amidala, Qui-Gon and Obi-Wan escape the blockade.
They land on Tatooine to repair their starship, and meet a nine-year-old slave named Anakin Skywalker.
Believing him to be the prophesied "Chosen One", Qui-Gon takes Anakin to be trained as a Jedi.
The prequels were originally planned to fill in history tangential to the original trilogy, but Lucas realized that they could form the first half of one long story focusing on Anakin.
This would shape the film series into a self-contained saga.
In 1994, Lucas began writing the screenplay for the first prequel, initially titled Episode I: The Beginning.
Following the film's release, Lucas announced that he would be directing the next two.
===
Episode II –
Attack of the Clones ===
10 years later, an assassination attempt is made on Padmé Amidala, who is now serving as Naboo's senator.
Jedi Knight Obi-Wan Kenobi and his apprentice, Anakin, are assigned to protect her; Obi-Wan tracks the assassin, while Anakin and Padmé secretly fall in love.
Meanwhile, Chancellor Palpatine schemes to draw the galaxy into the Clone Wars between the Republic army of clone troopers led by the Jedi, and the Confederacy of Independent Systems led by Palpatine's Sith apprentice, Count Dooku.
The first draft of Episode II was completed just weeks before principal photography, and Lucas hired Jonathan Hales, a writer from The Young Indiana Jones Chronicles, to polish it.
Unsure of a title, Lucas had jokingly called the film "Jar Jar's Great Adventure".
In writing The Empire Strikes Back, Lucas initially considered that Lando Calrissian was a clone from a planet of clones which caused the Clone Wars mentioned in A New Hope.
He later came up with the concept of an army of clone shock troopers from a remote planet which attacked the Republic and were resisted by the Jedi.

===
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith ===
Three years into the Clone Wars, Anakin becomes disillusioned with the Jedi Council and begins to have visions of Padmé dying in childbirth.
Palpatine convinces Anakin that the dark side of the Force holds the power to save Padmé's life.
Desperate, Anakin submits to Palpatine and assumes the Sith moniker Darth Vader.
Palpatine orders the extermination of the Jedi and declares the former Republic an Empire.
Vader engages in a lightsaber duel with Obi-Wan on the volcanic planet Mustafar, while Padmé dies after giving birth to twins.
Work on Episode III began before Episode II was released, with one scene shot during the earlier film's production.
Lucas originally told concept artists that the film would open with a montage of the Clone Wars, and included a scene of Palpatine revealing to Anakin that he had willed his conception through the Force.
Lucas reviewed and radically reorganized the plot, having Anakin execute Dooku in the first act to foreshadow his fall to the dark side.
After principal photography was completed in 2003, Lucas made more changes, rewriting Anakin's arc.
He would now primarily turn to the dark side in a quest to save Padmé, rather than just believing that the Jedi are plotting to take over the Republic.
The rewrite was accomplished both through editing principal footage, and filming new and revised scenes during pick-ups in 2004.

==
Themes ==
Lucas made a conscious effort to parallel scenes and dialogue between the prequel and original trilogy, especially concerning the journey of Anakin Skywalker in the prequels and that of his son Luke in the older films.
Together with the original trilogy, Lucas has collectively referred to the first six episodic films of the franchise as "the tragedy of Darth Vader".
According to Lucas, the correct order to watch the films is by episode order.
There are many references to Christianity in the prequel trilogy, such as the appearance of Darth Maul, whose design draws heavily from traditional depictions of the devil, complete with red skin and horns.
The Star Wars film cycle features a similar Christian narrative involving Anakin Skywalker; he is the "Chosen One"—the individual prophesied to bring balance to the Force—who was conceived of a virgin birth.
However, unlike Jesus, Anakin falls from grace and seemingly fails to fulfill his destiny (until the prophecy comes true in Return of the Jedi).
The saga draws heavily from the hero's journey, an archetypical template developed by comparative mythologist Joseph Campbell.
Political science has been an important element of Star Wars since the franchise launched in 1977, focusing on a struggle between democracy and dictatorship.

Palpatine being a chancellor before becoming the Emperor in the prequel
trilogy alludes to Adolf Hitler's role as chancellor before appointing himself Führer.
Lucas has also drawn parallels between Palpatine and historical dictators such as Julius Caesar and Napoleon Bonaparte, as well as former president of the United States Richard Nixon.
The Great Jedi Purge depicted in Revenge of the Sith mirrors the events of the Night of the Long Knives.
The corruption of the Galactic Republic is modeled after the fall of the democratic Roman Republic and the formation of an empire.

==
Re-releases ==
In 2011, box sets of the original and prequel trilogy were released on Blu-ray, all including alterations.

3D releases were planned for the then-six-film franchise, but after the financially unsuccessful 2012 3D release of The Phantom Menace, the rest were cancelled to focus on the sequels.

On April 11, 2019, it was announced that the prequel trilogy would be available upon the launch of streaming service Disney+.
==
Reception ==
The prequel trilogy received mixed reviews, generally transitioning from negative to positive with each installment.
Common criticisms surrounded the over-reliance on  computer-generated imagery and green screens, melodramatic and wooden dialogue including scenes of romance between Anakin and Padmé, slow-paced political scenes, and the comic relief character of Jar Jar Binks.
Director of the first and third film of the Star Wars sequel
trilogy J. J. Abrams criticized Darth Maul's quick death.
Many expressed their disappointment with the trilogy's portrayal of Anakin Skywalker, particularly calling the writing weak and the dialogue wooden, although Hayden Christensen's performance in the third film was more well-received.
Contrarily, Ewan McGregor's portrayal of Obi-Wan Kenobi, following in the footsteps of Sir Alec Guinness, has been generally praised.
Natalie Portman has expressed her disappointment with the trilogy's negative reception, saying that "When something has that much anticipation it can almost only disappoint."
She also acknowledged that "With the perspective of time, it's been re-evaluated by a lot of people who actually really love them now.
"The
trilogy has also received some criticism for clashing aesthetically with the original trilogy.
While the older films feature rough and aged technology, the prequels depict relatively sleek and new industrial designs.
Some have criticized this design choice by saying that it makes the earlier time period appear to depict a more advanced civilization, although Revenge of the Sith brings the design closer to that of the original trilogy.
Conversely, some argue for the prequel trilogy's positive elements, including its handling of political issues, especially involving the rise of fascism.
This includes Star Wars: The Last Jedi director and writer Rian Johnson, who also praised its visual effects innovations.
Jar Jar Binks has been regarded as the first fully CGI character in a live-action film, and perceived as paving the way for Gollum in The Lord of the Rings.
J. J. Abrams praised the acting of Ian McDiarmid as Darth Sidious, saying the scene where he tells the tragedy of Darth Plagueis is the best scene of the trilogy.
In 2020, Screen Rant compared the way the prequel trilogy ended the saga compared to Disney's sequel trilogy, writing, "Amidst the bad execution of the story, the fact of the matter is, the prequel movies tell one coherent narrative, with a clear through-line between movies – this is something sorely lacking in the sequel trilogy.
"George
Lucas has responded to the negative criticism by saying that, like the original films, they were intended "for 12-year-olds"—while acknowledging that fans who saw the originals when they were young had different expectations as adults.
The prequels have been noted as retaining a dedicated fanbase, primarily composed of millennials who were children at the time of their release.
Additionally, the animated The Clone Wars series, which Lucas made with animation artist Dave Filoni, has been noted to have retroactively improved the perception of the prequel trilogy among fans.

===
Critical response ===


===
Academy Awards ===


===
Box office performance ===


==
References ==
Footnotes
Citations


===
Sources ===
Star Wars: The High Republic, initially promoted as Project Luminous, is a subseries of the Star Wars media franchise set during the "High Republic" sub-era of the Age of Republic, set 200 years before the events of the Skywalker saga and 800 years after the fall of the "Old Republic".
In-universe, the initiating event of the subfranchise is "The Great Disaster" involving the antagonistic "space Vikings" known as the Nihil and the subsequent intervention of the Jedi.

==
History ==
"Project Luminous" was started in September 2018 with invitations to Star Wars authors including Claudia Gray, Justina Ireland, Daniel José Older, Cavan Scott, and Charles Soule to Skywalker Ranch, with Lucasfilm offering them a "blank slate" in determining the project.
Lucasfilm had teased "Project Luminous" in April 2019, prompting intense fan speculation.
On February 24, 2020, Lucasfilm announced a new series of comics and novels called Star Wars: The High Republic, intended to be a publisher-only multimedia project, unrelated to any films in development.
A trailer was released showing events taking place
two centuries before the events of Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace.
It shows the Jedi at the height of their power and rise of the Nihil.
The series was originally intended to debut with the Light of the Jedi novel in August 2020, a few days before Star Wars Celebration 2020, but was delayed due to the COVID-19 pandemic until January 2021.
The first chapter of the novel was released in June 2020 through IGN.
In November 2020, the second chapter of the novel was released on StarWars.com, followed by the next six through the Penguin Random House website.
In December 2020, Disney released a free digital sampler of early chapters of the first phase of High Republic books and comics, revealing the main characters for each series.
On Disney Investor Day 2020, it was revealed that Leslye Headland's The Acolyte series for Disney+ would take place during the late High Republic era.
Shortly after, Tencent began releasing Star Wars: The Vow of Silver Dawn, an eBook created specifically for Chinese audiences in collaboration with Lucasfilm.
The Vow of Silver Dawn also takes place near the end of the High Republic era, said to be approximately 50 years prior to The Phantom Menace.
Lucasfilm has stated that they currently have no plans for an English translation and release.
On January 4, 2021, a day prior to the release of the first novels, Lucasfilm hosted a launch event where they gave more information regarding the works released following the first batch of novels and comics.
This included the fact that Star Wars Insider would have monthly short stories as part of the publishing initiative, written by Scott and Ireland, several newly announced books releasing in the Summer of 2021, and that the first phase of The High Republic would last into 2022.
The second phase was given the name "Quest of the Jedi", and the third "Trials of the Jedi".
== Works ==


===
Phase I —
Light of the Jedi ===


====
Short stories ====
"Go Together, Part 1" (December 15, 2020), written by Charles Soule, and published in Star Wars Insider #199 from Titan Magazines.
It acts as a prequel to Soule's novel Light of the Jedi.

"Go Together, Part 2" (February 10, 2021), written by Charles Soule, and published in Star Wars Insider #200.
The short story acts as an epilogue to the novel Light of the Jedi.

"First Duty" (March 17, 2021), written by Cavan Scott for Star Wars Insider #201.
The story will feature the character Velko, the first aid to the head of Starlight Beacon, meant to act as a view into the High Republic outside of the Jedi.

====
Novels ====


=====
Adult novels =====
Star Wars:
The High Republic – Light of the Jedi (January 5, 2021) by Charles Soule, published by Del Rey.
The novel features the Great Disaster, the inciting incident of the event, when a ship was destroyed while in hyperspace, resulting in pieces of it threatening to destroy an entire system.

Star Wars: The High Republic – The Rising Storm (July 6, 2021) by Cavan Scott, published by Del Rey.
The novel features the Republic Fair, a gathering to celebrate the great things and new inventions of the Republic, and involves the Jedi Stellan Gios as well as a monster hunter named Ty Yorrick.

=====
Young adult novels =====
Star Wars: The High Republic – Into the Dark (February 2, 2021) by Claudia Gray, published by Disney–Lucasfilm Press.
The novel features Padawan Reath Silas, whose ship is knocked out of hyperspace, forcing him to take shelter in a mysterious abandoned space station.

Star Wars: The High Republic –
Out of the Shadows (July 27, 2021) by Justina Ireland, published by Disney–Lucasfilm Press.
It continues the story of Vernestra Rwoh from A Test of Courage.

=====
Middle-grade novels =====
Star Wars:
The High Republic – A Test of Courage
(January 5, 2021) by Justina Ireland, published by Disney–Lucasfilm Press.
The novel shows young Jedi Vernestra Rwoh and Imri Cantaros, as well as several children, aboard a ship bombed by the Nihil, forcing them to survive on a hostile jungle moon.

Star Wars:
The High Republic – Race to Crashpoint Tower (June 29, 2021) by Daniel José Older, published by Disney–Lucasfilm Press.
Taking place at the same time as The Rising Storm, it features Padawans Ramjo Maram, a gifted mechanic from a small planet getting his first glimpse at the larger galaxy through the Republic Fair, and Lula Talisola from The High Republic Adventures.

=====
Young reader books =====
Star Wars:
The High Republic – The Great Jedi Rescue (January 5, 2021) by Cavan Scott, published by Disney–Lucasfilm Press.
It serves as a young reader adaptation of Light of the Jedi by Charles Soule.

An untitled book to be released on July 6, 2021, published by Disney–Lucasfilm Press.

====
Comics ====
Star Wars:
The High Republic, an ongoing comic book by Cavan Scott with art by Ario Anindito published by Marvel Comics.
The series premiered on January 6, 2021, beginning with the arc "There is No Fear", taking place directly after the novel Light of the Jedi and featuring young Padawan Keeve Trennis.

Star Wars:
The High Republic Adventures, an ongoing comic book by Daniel José Older with art by Harvey Tolibao, and published by IDW Comics.
It features the character Yoda, on sabbatical from the Jedi Council, mentoring a group of young Padawans.
The first issue released on February 3, 2021.

Star Wars:
The High Republic – The Edge of Balance, an original manga written by Justina Ireland and Shima Shinya with art by Mizuki Sakakibara published by Viz Media.
It will focus on Jedi posted on smaller planets, emphasising on their role as a protector of the people, and features original Jedi Lily Tora-Asi and Arkoff, as well as Stellan Gios, who appears in several stories in the event, combating the attacking Dregir.
The first volume releases on June 6, 2021.

Star Wars:
The High Republic –
The Monster of Temple Peak, a graphic novel written by Cavan Scott with art by Rachel Stott.
The novel expands on Ty Yorrick, a character introduced in The Rising Storm.

===
Web series ===
Characters of Star Wars: The High Republic, a series of animated shorts that tells the stories of The High Republic's heroes and villains.
The first short, highlighting A Test of Courage character Vernestra Rwoh, released on January 19, 2021 on the official Star Wars YouTube channel and website.

Star Wars:
The High Republic Show, a behind-the-scenes web series hosted by Krystina Arielle on the official Star Wars YouTube channel and website.
The series will release on a bi-monthly basis, and feature guests from the initiative discussing the works and what went into making them.
The first episode premiered on January 27, 2021.
===
Related works ===
Temple of Darkness, an expansion for the virtual reality game
Star Wars:
Tales from the Galaxy's Edge that takes place during the High Republic, developed by ILMxLab.
The game features Jedi Padawan Ady Sun’Zee, the sole survivor of an encounter with an evil relic on Batuu, who works with Yoda to confront it.

Star Wars:
The Vow of Silver Dawn, a Chinese language eBook written by an author by the pen name "His Majesty the King".
The Vow of Silver Dawn was created in collaboration between Lucasfilm and Tencent in an effort to create an interest in Star Wars among a Chinese audience, and was released chapter-by-chapter.
The eBook takes place near the end of the High Republic era, 50 years before The Phantom Menace, and features a young Jedi named Sean with a secret past, patrolling the Outer Rim.
Lucasfilm has stated there are no plans for an English translation and release.

Star Wars:
The Acolyte, a Disney+ original series written by Leslye Headland, who also serves as showrunner.
The series is "mystery-thriller" featuring "emerging dark side powers in the final days of the High Republic era".

== Reception ==
In the first week of its release, the event's debut novel Light of the Jedi was the #2 best selling novel on Amazon, and #1 on  The New York Times Best Seller list of hardcover fiction, staying on the list for four weeks.
A Test of Courage, which released on the same day, debuted at #2 on The New York Times list for children's middle grade hardcover books, staying on the list for two weeks.
The third novel, Into the Dark, gained similar success by debuting on #1 on the list for young adult hardcover novels.
The first two issues of Marvel's The High Republic comic book series were the best-selling digital comics on Comixology during the week of their release.
The first issue sold over 200,000 physical pre-orders to comic book shops, prompting Marvel to create a second printing of the issue before its official release, as well as third and fourth printings shortly after.
==
References ==


==
External links ==
Star Wars (Lucasfilm):
Star Wars: The High Republic — Announcement Trailer on YouTube
Star Wars:
The High Republic on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Sheev Palpatine is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise created by George Lucas.
Initially credited as The Emperor in the 1980 film The Empire Strikes Back, Palpatine is also known by his Sith title Darth Sidious.

The character appears in each trilogy in the nine-film Skywalker saga, in which he is portrayed by Ian McDiarmid and serves as the overarching villain.
In the original trilogy, Palpatine is depicted as emperor of the Galactic Empire and the master of Darth Vader.
In the prequel trilogy, he is portrayed as a charismatic politician and Sith Lord who transforms the Galactic Republic into the Empire, and turns Jedi Knight Anakin Skywalker to the dark side of the Force.
In The Rise of Skywalker (2019), the final film in the sequel trilogy, Palpatine is revealed to be the mastermind behind the First Order and its former leader, Snoke, as well as the grandfather of Rey.

Since the release of Return of the Jedi (1983), Palpatine has become a widely recognized symbol of evil in popular culture, and since the prequel films, also one of sinister deception and the subversion of democracy.
Aside from the films, Palpatine appears in various canon and non-canon Star Wars media.

==
Character overview ==
In the fictional universe of the Star Wars franchise, Palpatine is a master manipulator and "phantom menace".
Though appearing to be a well-intentioned senator and supporter of democracy before becoming emperor, Palpatine is actually Darth Sidious, the dark lord of the Sith—a cult of practitioners of the dark side of the Force—and master of Darth Maul and Count Dooku.
As Sidious, Palpatine engineers the invasion of Naboo, using the conflict to get elected as Supreme Chancellor of the Galactic Republic.
He later masterminds the Clone Wars to grant himself dictatorial emergency powers and stay in office long after his term expires.
Palpatine proceeds to all but exterminate the Jedi Order through Order 66, and manipulates Jedi Knight Anakin Skywalker into becoming his new apprentice, Darth Vader.
He ultimately reorganizes the Republic into the Galactic Empire, using Machiavellian manipulation to invoke martial law and declare himself emperor.
Palpatine rules the galaxy for over two decades before Vader betrays and kills him to save his son, Luke Skywalker.
Unbeknownst to the galaxy, however, Palpatine's spirit lives on.
He secretly masterminds the First Order to restore the Empire, with Snoke as his puppet ruler.
Having covertly turned Kylo Ren—Anakin's grandson and Luke's nephew—to the dark side, Palpatine orders Ren to find and kill Rey, the last remaining Jedi and Palpatine's paternal granddaughter.
Palpatine uses the dark side to rejuvenate his body, but is finally defeated and destroyed by Rey.
==
Appearances ==


===
Film ===


====
Original trilogy ====
Palpatine is referred to as "The Emperor" in the original trilogy.
The character is briefly mentioned in Star Wars (1977), the first film in the original trilogy, which was later subtitled Episode IV – A New Hope.
On the Death Star, Grand Moff Tarkin (Peter Cushing) explains to his fellow Imperials that the Emperor has dissolved the Imperial Senate.
The Emperor does not appear onscreen, leaving Tarkin and Darth Vader (portrayed by David Prowse, voiced by James Earl Jones) as the film's main villains.
The Emperor first appears in The Empire Strikes Back, the 1980 sequel to the original film.
He appears as a hologram to inform Vader that Luke Skywalker (Mark Hamill) has become a threat to the Empire.
Vader persuades him that the young Jedi would be a great asset if he could be turned to the dark side of the Force.
In 1983's Return of the Jedi, the Emperor appears in person to oversee the last stages of the second Death Star's construction.
He assures Vader that they will together turn Luke, Vader's son, to the dark side of the Force.
Unknown to Vader, the Emperor plans to replace his apprentice with Luke; Vader, meanwhile, intends to overthrow the Emperor and rule the galaxy with Luke at his side.
When Vader brings Luke before his master, the Emperor tempts Luke to join the dark side by appealing to the young Jedi's fear for his friends, whom he has lured into a trap.
This leads to a lightsaber duel in which Luke defeats and nearly kills Vader.
The Emperor urges Luke to kill Vader and take his place, but Luke refuses and declares himself a Jedi.
Enraged, the Emperor attacks Luke with Force lightning.
Unable to bear the sight of his son in pain, Vader throws the Emperor into the Death Star's reactor, killing him.

====
Prequel
trilogy ====
In the 1999 prequel
Episode I:
The Phantom Menace, set 32 years before A New Hope, Palpatine (named onscreen for the first time) is depicted as a middle-aged Galactic Senator from the planet Naboo.
As his alter ego, the Sith Lord Darth Sidious, he advises the corrupt Trade Federation to blockade and invade Naboo.
Queen Padmé Amidala of Naboo (Natalie Portman) flees to the planet Coruscant to receive counsel from Palpatine, unaware that he actually engineered the invasion.
After a plea for help from the Senate results in bureaucratic delays, Palpatine persuades Padmé to call for a motion of no confidence against Supreme Chancellor Finis Valorum (Terence Stamp).When Padmé attempts to liberate Naboo, Sidious sends his apprentice Darth Maul (portrayed by Ray Park, voiced by Peter Serafinowicz) to capture her.
The invasion is eventually thwarted and Maul is defeated in a lightsaber duel with Jedi Padawan Obi-Wan Kenobi (Ewan McGregor).
Palpatine uses the crisis to get elected as the new Chancellor of the Republic.
He then returns to Naboo, where he befriends the young Anakin Skywalker (Jake Lloyd), telling the boy, "We will watch your career with great interest.
"In
the 2002 sequel Episode II:
Attack of the Clones, set 10 years later, Palpatine exploits constitutional loopholes to remain in office after his term expires.
Meanwhile, as Sidious, he continues to manipulate events from behind the scenes by having his new Sith apprentice Count Dooku (Christopher Lee) lead a movement of planets in seceding to form the Confederacy of Independent Systems.
He has the Separatists try to assassinate Padmé, now a senator, but the attempt on her life fails.
He then arranges for Anakin (now played by Hayden Christensen) to guard Padmé on Naboo, which leads to them falling in love and marrying in secret.
With the Separatists secretly building a battle droid army, Palpatine uses the situation to have himself granted emergency powers.
Palpatine feigns reluctance to accept this authority, promising to return it to the Senate once the crisis has ended.
His first act is to allow a clone army's creation to counter the Separatist threat; this results in the first battle of the Clone Wars.
With the galaxy now at war as Sidious planned, Dooku brings him the secret plans for the Death Star.
In the 2005 sequel Episode III: Revenge of the Sith, set three years later, Palpatine is captured by cyborg Separatist leader General Grievous (voiced by Matthew Wood).
Palpatine is rescued by Anakin and Obi-Wan, but not before the Jedi confront Dooku again.
A duel ensues in which Anakin disarms and kills Dooku at Palpatine's urging.
Palpatine then escapes with his rescuers and returns to Coruscant.
By this point, Palpatine has become a virtual dictator, able to take any action in the Senate.
He makes Anakin his personal representative on the Jedi Council, whose members deny Anakin the rank of Jedi Master and order him to spy on the Chancellor.
Palpatine tells Anakin the story of Darth Plagueis, a powerful Sith Lord who was able to manipulate life and death but was killed by his own apprentice.
Eventually, Palpatine reveals his secret Sith identity to Anakin; he knows that Anakin has been having prophetic visions of Padmé dying in childbirth, and offers to teach him Plagueis' secrets to save Padmé's life.
Anakin informs Jedi Master Mace Windu (Samuel L. Jackson) of Palpatine's treachery.
With three other Jedi masters at his side, Windu attempts to arrest Palpatine, but Palpatine produces a lightsaber and quickly dispatches all but Windu.
Palpatine engages Windu in a duel and attacks him with Force lightning; Windu deflects the lightning back into Palpatine's face, deforming it into the gray, wizened visage first seen in the original trilogy.
Just as Windu is about to kill Palpatine, Anakin appears and intervenes on the Sith lord's behalf, allowing Palpatine to kill Windu with another blast of lightning.
Anakin then pledges himself to the dark side as Palpatine's Sith apprentice, Darth Vader.
Palpatine issues Order 66, commanding the clone troopers to turn on their Jedi generals, while dispatching Vader to kill everyone inside the Jedi Temple and then murder the Separatist leaders on the planet Mustafar.
Palpatine then reorganizes the Republic into the Galactic Empire, with himself as Emperor.
Jedi Master Yoda (voiced by Frank Oz) confronts Palpatine and engages him in a lightsaber duel that ends in a stalemate.
Sensing that Vader is in trouble, Palpatine travels to Mustafar and finds his new apprentice near death following a duel with Obi-Wan.
After returning to Coruscant, he rebuilds Vader's burned, mutilated body with the black armored suit from the original trilogy.
Palpatine then tells Vader that Padmé was killed in the heat of Vader's anger, devastating Vader.
Palpatine is last seen watching the original Death Star's construction, with Vader and Wilhuff Tarkin (Wayne Pygram) at his side.

====
Sequel
trilogy ====
The sequel trilogy is set three decades following the events of Return of the Jedi (1983).
The First Order has risen from the fallen Empire and seeks to destroy the New Republic, the Resistance, and Jedi Master Luke Skywalker.
In the trilogy's first installment, The Force Awakens (2015), Palpatine's voice is heard during a vision that the protagonist Rey (Daisy Ridley) experiences upon touching Luke and Anakin's lightsaber.
In the sequel, The Last Jedi (2017), Luke briefly mentions Palpatine as Darth Sidious while explaining the fall of the Jedi Order to Rey.
Palpatine, again played by McDiarmid, appears in the trilogy's final film, The Rise of Skywalker (2019).
Prior to the film's opening, Palpatine threatens revenge against the Jedi and the Resistance, having cheated death through dark science and "unnatural" Sith abilities.
This prompts First Order leader and fallen Jedi Kylo Ren
(Adam Driver)—the grandson of Anakin and nephew of Luke—to seek him out on the Sith planet Exegol, where a physically impaired Palpatine is supported by machinery.
Palpatine reveals himself as the mastermind behind the First Order and Ren's former master, Snoke (Andy Serkis), whom he created to lure Ren to the dark side.
He then unveils the Final Order, a massive fleet of superlaser-equipped Star Destroyers.
Palpatine offers the fleet to Ren on the condition that he find and kill the galaxy's last remaining Jedi, Rey, who is revealed to be Palpatine's granddaughter.
It is subsequently revealed that Palpatine had a son, who renounced his father; he and his partner took their daughter Rey to the planet Jakku, assuming lives as "nobodies" to keep her safe.
Palpatine eventually found Rey's parents and had them killed, but never found Rey.
Near the end of the film, Rey arrives on Exegol to confront Palpatine.
Surrounded by his followers, Palpatine embodies all the Sith's power.
He orders Rey to kill him in anger for his spirit to pass into her.
Rey refuses; she and Ren (now the redeemed Ben Solo) confront Palpatine together.
Sensing their power as a dyad in the Force, Palpatine absorbs their life energy to rejuvenate his body.
He incapacitates Ben and attacks the Resistance fleet with Force lightning.
Rey uses the power of the past Jedi to face Palpatine once more; he attacks her with lightning, but Rey deflects it using the Skywalker lightsabers, finally destroying him and the Sith.
===
Television ===


====
The Clone Wars ====
In the 2008 animated film Star Wars: The Clone Wars and the subsequent animated series (set between Attack of the Clones and Revenge of the Sith), Palpatine continues to serve as Supreme Chancellor while his Sith identity orchestrates the Clone Wars behind the scenes.
Palpatine was voiced by Ian Abercrombie (from 2008 to his death in 2012), and by Tim Curry (from 2012 to 2014).
In the film, Sidious engineers a Separatist plot in which Count Dooku (voiced by Corey Burton) turns Jabba the Hutt against the Republic by kidnapping his son Rotta and framing the Jedi for it.
Meanwhile, Palpatine suggests that the Republic ally itself with the Hutts.
Although Anakin Skywalker and his Padawan Ahsoka Tano (voiced by Ashley Eckstein) foil the plot, the outcome suits Palpatine's ends:
Jabba places Hutt hyperspace routes at the Republic's disposal.
In season two of the TV series, Sidious hires bounty hunter Cad Bane (voiced by Corey Burton) to infiltrate the Jedi Temple and steal a holocron.
He then takes a valuable Kyber memory crystal that contains the names of thousands of Force-sensitive younglings – the future of the Jedi Order – from around the galaxy.
The final stage of the plot: to bring four Force-sensitive children to Sidious' secret facility on Mustafar.
Anakin and Ahsoka again foil the plot, but Bane escapes and all evidence of Sidious' involvement is lost.
In season three, Sidious senses Dooku's minion Asajj Ventress (voiced by Nika Futterman) becoming powerful in the dark side and orders Dooku to eliminate her; he suspects that Dooku is planning to have Ventress assassinate him.
Ventress survives and her revenge against Dooku sets off a chain of events including the return of Sidious' former apprentice and Dooku's predecessor, Darth Maul.
In season five, Sidious personally travels to the planet Mandalore to confront Maul, who has become the leader of Death Watch.
Sidious kills Savage Opress (voiced by Clancy Brown) before torturing Maul with the intent to make use of his former apprentice.
In season six, Sidious goes to lengths to conceal his plan's full nature from the Jedi by silencing Clone Trooper Fives from learning of Order 66, and having Dooku wipe out anything tied to the former Jedi Master's connection to the conspiracy.

====
Rebels ====
In Star Wars Rebels, set between Revenge of the Sith and A New Hope, Palpatine is portrayed as the Emperor of the Galactic Empire.
He briefly appears off-screen at the end of season two's premiere "The Siege of Lothal" (originally voiced by Sam Witwer and later Ian McDiarmid from 2019).
Darth Vader informs Palpatine that the Rebel Alliance cell on Lothal has been broken, and that Ahsoka Tano is alive and is now helping the Rebels.
Palpatine sees this as an opportunity to seek out other remaining Jedi, ordering Vader to dispatch an Inquisitor to hunt down Ahsoka.
Palpatine returns physically in season four (voiced again by McDiarmid).
In the episodes "Wolves and a Door" and "A World Between Worlds", he appears as a hologram overseeing the excavation of the Lothal Jedi Temple, which contains a portal to a separate dimension of the Force outside of space and time, which Palpatine considers a 'conduit between the living and the dead' that could give him unrivaled power of the Force itself if he can access it.
Shortly after protagonist Ezra Bridger (voiced by Taylor Gray) reaches through time and space to rescue Ahsoka from Vader, Palpatine sets up a portal that shows Kanan Jarrus' (voiced by Freddie Prinze Jr.) final moments.
While Ezra wants to reach through the portal and rescue Kanan, Ahsoka convinces him not to.
Palpatine then reveals himself through the portal and shoots Ezra with Force lightning.
However, Ahsoka and Ezra manage to evade him and go their separate ways, thus denying Palpatine full power.
Palpatine later returns in the series finale "Family Reunion - and Farewell".
In the episode, Ezra, having surrendered himself to Grand Admiral Thrawn (voiced by Lars Mikkelsen) to protect Lothal, is taken by him to a room containing a reconstructed section of the ruined Jedi Temple and a hologram of Palpatine as he appears in the prequel films.
Palpatine, having acknowledged the threat Ezra poses to the Empire, presents himself as a kindly figure and shows Ezra a vision of his dead parents through a doorway, promising that the youth will be with them if he enters it.
Ezra is initially mesmerized by Palpatine's promise and goes to enter the door, but finally resists and destroys the reconstructed Jedi Temple and the illusion.
Palpatine's hologram emerges from the rubble, flickering to show his true self, and commands his Royal Guards to kill Ezra, though Ezra manages to defeat them and escape.
According to series creator Dave Filoni, the events of Rogue One and A New Hope happen shortly after this episode, thus refocusing Palpatine's attention from Ezra and Lothal's liberation to the Rebel Alliance and Luke Skywalker.

===
Books and comics ===
The first appearance of Palpatine in Star Wars literature was in the prologue of Alan Dean Foster's ghostwritten novelization of the script of A New Hope, published as Star Wars:
From the Adventures of Luke Skywalker (1976).
His background as a senator of the Republic was also further explored in James Kahn's novelization of Return of the Jedi.

Palpatine appears in Rae Carson's novelization of The Rise of Skywalker, which expands upon the film's story.
In the book, Palpatine is revealed to have discovered his former master Darth Plagueis's "secret to immortality", using this knowledge to survive after his death in Return of the Jedi.
The character also appears in the final chapter of the comic book Star Wars:
The Rise of Kylo Ren (2020), which illustrates Palpatine's manipulation of the young Ben Solo into becoming Kylo Ren.
Star Wars: Lords of the Sith (2015) was one of the first canon spin-off novels to be released in the Disney canon begun in 2014.
In it, Vader and Palpatine find themselves hunted by revolutionaries on the Twi'lek home planet Ryloth.
In Thrawn, the titular character warns Palpatine of "threats lurking in the Unknown Regions."
Chuck Wendig's Aftermath book trilogy reveals that, prior to his death, Palpatine enacted a plan for the remnants of the Empire to retreat to the Unknown Regions, where they formed into the First Order.
The dark side was thought to be concentrated in this region, where one Sith cultist believed that Palpatine would be found alive.
Palpatine also appears frequently in the comic book series Darth Vader: Dark Lord of the Sith (2017–2018), written by Kieron Gillen and Charles Soule.
It is suggested at the end of the series that Palpatine manipulated the Force to impregnate Vader's mother Shmi Skywalker, making him in essence Vader's father—although this is left somewhat ambiguous.
This builds on the plot point of Anakin's virgin birth introduced in The Phantom Menace, and the claim that a Sith lord "could use the Force to influence the midi-chlorians to create life," as Palpatine tells Anakin in Revenge of the Sith.
This would seem to have incestuous implications for Rey and Ben Solo at the end of The Rise of Skywalker, but Soule says that "The Dark Side is not a reliable narrator," and a Lucasfilm story group member who collaborated on the comic confirms that a direct connection between Palpatine and Vader was not their intent.

===
Video games ===
Star Wars Battlefront II adds a canonical tale spanning the destruction of the second Death Star through the events of The Force Awakens.
The story takes an Imperial perspective, following an elite squadron known as Inferno Squad, led by protagonist Iden Versio, as they help to execute Operation:
Cinder following the Emperor's death.
Operation:
Cinder was carried out by the Galactic Empire as a means of devastating several Imperial planets a few weeks after the Battle of Endor.
The operation was part of the "Contingency", a plan devised by Emperor Palpatine to ensure that the Empire and its enemies would not outlive him should he perish.
The plan was put into action following the Emperor's death during the Battle of Endor.
Palpatine's threat of revenge referenced in the opening crawl of The Rise of Skywalker was included in the finale of the Fortnite:
Battle Royale X Star Wars event.
The character also appears in Lego Star Wars:
The Skywalker Saga (2021).
===
Legends ===
In April 2014, Lucasfilm rebranded most of the licensed Star Wars novels and comics produced since the originating 1977 film Star Wars as Star Wars Legends and declared them non-canon to the franchise.
Star Wars Legends literature elaborates on Palpatine's role in Star Wars fiction outside of the films.

====
Television ====
Palpatine/Darth Sidious is a central character in Genndy Tartakovsky's Star Wars:
Clone Wars micro-series, which is set between Attack of the Clones and Revenge of the Sith.
The character's likeness in the series is voiced by Nick Jameson.
In the first chapter, Palpatine is informed by Obi-Wan Kenobi (voiced by James Arnold Taylor) that the Jedi have discovered that the InterGalactic Banking Clan has established battle droid factories on the planet Muunilinst.
Palpatine agrees to send a strike force that includes Anakin Skywalker (voiced by Matt Lanter), and suggests that Anakin be given "special command" of Obi-Wan's fighters.
Yoda and Obi-Wan initially speak against the idea, but reluctantly concede.
In the seventh chapter, a holographic image of Sidious appears shortly after Dooku trains Dark Jedi Asajj Ventress (voiced by Grey DeLisle).
Sidious orders Ventress to track down and kill Anakin.
He remarks to Dooku that Ventress is certain to be defeated, but that the point of her mission is to test Anakin.
In the final chapters, a hologram of Sidious again appears and orders General Grievous to begin an assault on the galactic capital.
Later, the Separatist invasion of Coruscant begins and Palpatine watches from his apartment in the 500 Republica.
Grievous breaks through the Chancellor's window and attempts to kidnap him, leading to a long chase while Palpatine is protected by Jedi Shaak Ti (voiced by Tasia Valenza), Roron Corobb and Foul Moudama.
After Grievous defeats the Jedi, Palpatine is taken on board the Invisible Hand, setting the stage for Revenge of the Sith.

====
Books and comics ====
Palpatine made his first major appearance in Star Wars-related comic books in 1991 and 1992, with the Dark Empire series written by Tom Veitch and illustrated by Cam Kennedy.
In the series (set six years after Return of the Jedi), Palpatine is resurrected as the Emperor Reborn or "Palpatine the Undying".
His spirit returns from the netherworld of the Force with the aid of Sith ghosts on Korriban, and possesses the body of Jeng Droga, one of Palpatine's elite spies and assassins known as the Emperor's Hands.
Droga flees to a secret Imperial base on the planet
Byss, where the Emperor's advisor Sate Pestage exorcises Palpatine's spirit and channels it into one of many clones created by Palpatine before his death.
Palpatine attempts to resume control of the galaxy, but Luke Skywalker, now a senior Jedi Knight, sabotages his plans.
Luke destroys most of Palpatine's cloning tanks, but is only able to defeat the Emperor with help from Leia Organa Solo, who has received rudimentary Jedi training from Luke.
The two repel a Force storm Palpatine had created and turn it back onto him, once again destroying his physical form.
Palpatine's ultimate fate is further chronicled in the Dark Empire II and Empire's End series of comics.
The Dark Empire II series, published from 1994 to 1995, details how the Emperor is once again reborn on Byss into a clone body.
Palpatine tries to rebuild the Empire as the Rebel Alliance grows weak.
In Empire's End (1995), a traitorous Imperial guard bribes Palpatine's cloning supervisor to tamper with the Emperor's stored DNA samples.
This causes the clones to deteriorate at a rapid rate.
Palpatine tries to possess the body of Anakin Solo, the infant son of Leia Organa and Han Solo, before the clone body dies, but is thwarted once again by Luke Skywalker.
Palpatine is killed by a blaster shot fired by Han, but his spirit is captured by the mortally wounded Jedi Empatojayos Brand.
When Brand dies, he takes Palpatine's spirit with him into the netherworld of the Force, destroying the Sith Lord once and for all.
Novels and comics published before 1999 focus on Palpatine's role as Galactic Emperor.
Shadows of the Empire (1996) by Steve Perry and The Mandalorian Armor (1998) by K. W. Jeter—all set between The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi—show how Palpatine uses crime lords such as Prince Xizor and bounty hunters like Boba Fett to fight his enemies.
Barbara Hambly's novel Children of the Jedi (1995), set eight years after Return of the Jedi, features a woman named Roganda Ismaren who claims that Palpatine fathered her son Irek.
The Jedi Prince series of novels introduces an insane, three-eyed mutant named Triclops who is revealed to be Palpatine's illegitimate son.
Created from DNA extracted from Palpatine and placed into a woman, he was born mutated, cast away and forgotten.
Triclops had a son named Ken who became known as the "Jedi Prince".

After the release of The Phantom Menace, writers were allowed to begin exploring Palpatine's backstory as a politician and Sith lord.
The comic "Marked" by Rob Williams, printed in Star Wars Tales 24 (2005), and Michael Reaves' novel Darth Maul: Shadow Hunter (2001) explain Darth Sidious' relationship with his apprentice Darth Maul.
Cloak of Deception (2001) by James Luceno follows Reaves' novel and details how Darth Sidious encourages the Trade Federation to build an army of battle droids in preparation for the invasion of Naboo.
Cloak of Deception also focuses on Palpatine's early political career, revealing how he becomes a confidante of Chancellor Finis Valorum and acquainted with Padmé Amidala, newly elected queen of Naboo.
Palpatine's role during the Clone Wars as Chancellor of the Republic and Darth Sidious is portrayed in novels such as Matthew Stover's Shatterpoint (2003), Steven Barnes' The Cestus Deception (2004), Sean Stewart's Yoda: Dark Rendezvous (2004), and Luceno's Labyrinth of Evil (2005) and Darth Plagueis (2012).

Following the theatrical release of Revenge of the Sith, Star Wars literature focused on Palpatine's role after the creation of the Empire.
John Ostrander's comic Star Wars Republic 78: Loyalties (2005) chronicles
how, shortly after seizing power, Emperor Palpatine sends Darth Vader to assassinate Sagoro Autem, an Imperial captain who plans to defect from the Empire.
In Luceno's novel Dark Lord: The Rise of Darth Vader (2005) (set shortly after Revenge of the Sith), the Emperor sends Darth Vader to the planet Murkhana to discover why clone troopers there refused to carry out Order 66 against their Jedi generals.
Palpatine hopes these early missions will teach Vader what it means to be a Sith and crush any remnants of Anakin Skywalker.
James Luceno's 2012 novel Darth Plagueis depicts Palpatine's early life, prior to the films.
The scion of an aristocratic family on Naboo, Palpatine first turns toward the dark side upon meeting the titular Sith lord.
Sensing great power in Palpatine, Plageuis takes him on as his Sith apprentice.
In the final test of his devotion to the dark side, Palpatine kills his parents and his brother and sister.

== Characterization ==
In Star Wars fiction, Palpatine is a cunning politician, a ruthless emperor, and an evil Sith Lord.
The Star Wars Databank describes him as "the supreme ruler of the most powerful tyrannical regime the galaxy had ever witnessed" and Stephen J. Sansweet's Star Wars Encyclopedia calls him "evil
incarnate".
As a senator, Palpatine is "unassuming, yet ambitious".
In Cloak of Deception, James Luceno writes that Palpatine carefully guards his privacy and
"others found his reclusiveness intriguing, as if he led a secret life".
Despite this, he has many allies in the government.
Luceno writes, "What Palpatine lacked in charisma, he made up for in candor, and it was that directness that had led to his widespread appeal in the senate. ...
For in his heart he judged the universe on his own terms, with a clear sense of right and wrong."
In Terry Brooks' novelization of The Phantom Menace, Palpatine claims to embrace democratic principles.
He tells Queen Amidala, "I promise, Your Majesty, if I am elected [chancellor of the Republic], I will restore democracy to the Republic.
I will put an end to the corruption that has plagued the Senate."
A Visual Dictionary states that he is a self-proclaimed savior.
As Emperor, however, Palpatine abandons any semblance of democracy, as noted in A New Hope, when he abolishes the Imperial Senate.
Sansweet states, "His Empire ... is based on tyranny.
"Revenge of the Sith implies that Palpatine was the apprentice of Darth Plagueis, while later Expanded Universe materials say explicitly that he was.
Palpatine is characterized as "the most powerful practitioner of the Sith ways in modern times.
"
Palpatine is so powerful that he is able to mask his true identity from the Jedi for decades.
In the novel Shatterpoint, Mace Windu remarks to Yoda, "A shame [Palpatine] can't touch the Force.
He might have been a fine Jedi.
"The
Star Wars Databank explains that the Force "granted him inhuman dexterity and speed, agility enough to quickly kill three Jedi Masters" (as depicted in Revenge of the Sith).
Stover describes the duel between Yoda and Palpatine in his novelization of Revenge of the Sith thus: "From the shadow of a black wing, a small weapon ... slid into a withered hand and spat a flame-colored blade ...
When those blades met, it was more than Yoda against Palpatine, more the millennia of Sith against the legions of Jedi; this was the expression of the fundamental conflict of the universe itself.
Light against dark.
Winner take all."
During the duel, Yoda realizes that Sidious is a superior warrior, and represents a small but powerful Sith Order that had changed and evolved over the years, while the Jedi had not: "He had lost before he started.
He had lost before he was born.
"According
to the Databank and New Essential Guide to Characters, Palpatine possesses great patience and his maneuverings are as a dejarik grandmaster moves pieces on a board.
He is depicted as a diabolical genius.
Palpatine was not given a first name in any canonical or "Star Wars Legends" sources until 2014, when the character's first name—Sheev—was revealed in the novel Tarkin, written by James Luceno.
The Lucasfilm Story Group approached Del Rey Books and asked if they wanted to use the name, which was created by George Lucas, in the Tarkin novel, to which Del Rey agreed.

===
Creation ===
Lucas' conceptualization of Palpatine and the role the character plays in Star Wars changed over time.
From Return of the Jedi onwards, Palpatine became the ultimate personification of evil in Star Wars, replacing Darth Vader as the central villain.

When the original Star Wars trilogy was filmed, the Emperor was unnamed and his throne-world unidentified.
The name would not be used in film until the prequel trilogy, and the first mention of the name Palpatine came from the prologue of Alan Dean Foster's 1976 novelization of A New Hope, which detailed the Emperor's rise to power.
Foster writes,

Aided and abetted by restless, power-hungry individuals within the government, and the massive organs of commerce, the ambitious Senator Palpatine caused himself to be elected President of the Republic.
He promised to reunite the disaffected among the people and to restore the remembered glory of the Republic.
Once secure in office he declared himself Emperor, shutting himself away from the populace.
Soon he was controlled by the very assistants and boot-lickers he had appointed to high office, and the cries of the people for justice did not reach his ears.

It is unclear whether Lucas intended Palpatine to be the reigning Emperor or just the first of a succession of emperors.
In The Secret History of Star Wars, Michael Kaminski states that Lucas' initial notes discuss a line of corrupt emperors, not just one.
If Palpatine was the first, Kaminski infers, he would therefore not be the current emperor.
However, by the time of Return of the Jedi and its novelization, Palpatine was made the name of the current emperor.
During story conferences for The Empire Strikes Back, Lucas and Leigh Brackett decided that "the Emperor and the Force had to be the two main concerns in [the film]; the Emperor had barely been dealt with in the first movie, and the intention in the sequel was to deal with him on a more concrete level.
"
Lucas ultimately decided instead to focus on the Emperor in Return of the Jedi.

In that film, the initial conception of Palpatine was superseded by his depiction as a dictatorial ruler adept in the dark side of the Force.
The Emperor was inspired by the villain Ming the Merciless from the Flash Gordon comic books.
The characterization of Palpatine as an ambitious and ruthless politician dismantling a democratic republic to achieve supreme power is in part inspired by the real-world examples of Julius Caesar, Napoleon Bonaparte, and Adolf Hitler.
Other elements of the character come from Richard Nixon.
Lucas said that Nixon's presidency "got me to thinking historically about how do democracies get turned into dictatorships.
Because the democracies aren't overthrown; they're given away.
"
Lucas also said, "The whole point of the movies, the underlying element that makes the movies work, is that you, whether you go backwards or forwards, you start out in a democracy, and democracy turns into a dictatorship, and then the rebels make it back into a democracy.
"Lucas wanted to establish the Emperor as the true source of evil in Star Wars.
Screenwriter Lawrence Kasdan noted, "My sense of the relationship between Darth Vader and the Emperor is that the Emperor is much more powerful ... and that Vader is very much intimidated by him.
Vader has dignity, but the Emperor in Jedi really has all the power."
He explained that the climax of the film is a confrontation between Darth Vader and his master.
In the first scene that shows the Emperor, he arrives at the Death Star and is greeted by a host of stormtroopers, technicians, and other personnel.
Lucas states he wanted it to look like the military parades on "May Day in Russia.
"Lucas fleshed out the Emperor in the prequel films.
According to Lucas, Palpatine's role in The Phantom Menace is to explain "how Anakin Skywalker came to be Palpatine's apprentice" and the events that led to his rise to power.
According to film critic Jonathan L. Bowen, "Debates raged on the Internet concerning the relationship between Darth Sidious and Senator Palpatine.
Most fans believed the two characters are actually the same person with logic seeming to support their conclusion."
Bowen notes that the debate was fueled by the fact that "suspiciously Darth Sidious does not appear in the credits."

In Star Wars and History published by Lucasfilm, it describes Palpatine's consolidation of power as being similar to the Roman political figure Augustus.
Both legitimized authoritarian rule by saying that corruption in the Senate was hampering the powers of the head of state; both pressured the Senate to grant extraordinary powers to deal with a crisis, falsely claiming that they would rescind those powers once the crisis was over; and both relied on their strong control over military force.

===
Portrayal ===
When the Emperor first appeared in The Empire Strikes Back, he was portrayed by Marjorie Eaton under heavy makeup.
Chimpanzee eyes were superimposed into darkened eye sockets during post-production "in order to create a truly unsettling image".
The character was voiced by Clive Revill.
The makeup was sculpted by Phil Tippett and applied by Rick Baker, who initially used his own wife, Elaine, for the makeup tests.
"With
[director Irvin] Kershner," Revill said, "you had to keep the reins tight — you couldn't go overboard.
It was the perfect example of the old adage 'less is more' — the Emperor doesn't say very much.
But when he finally appears, it's at a point in the saga when everyone's waiting to see him.
It's the Emperor, the arch villain of all time, and when he says there's a great disturbance in the Force, I mean, that's enough oomph!
"
Years later, during production of Revenge of the Sith, Lucas decided to shoot new footage for The Empire Strikes Back to create continuity between the prequels and original trilogy.
Thus, in the 2004 DVD release of The Empire Strikes Back Special Edition, the original version of the Emperor was replaced by Scottish Shakespearean actor Ian McDiarmid, and the dialogue between the Emperor and Darth Vader was revised.
Lucas and director Richard Marquand cast McDiarmid to play Emperor Palpatine for Return of the Jedi.
He was in his late 30s and had never played a leading role in a feature film, though he had made minor appearances in films like Dragonslayer (1981).
After Return of the Jedi, he resumed stage acting in London.
In an interview with BackStage, McDiarmid revealed that he "never had his sights set on a film career and never even auditioned for the role of Palpatine."
He elaborated, "I got called in for the interview after a Return of the Jedi casting director saw me perform in the Sam Shepard play Seduced at a studio theatre at the Royal Court.
I was playing a dying Howard Hughes.
"McDiarmid was surprised when Lucas approached him 16 years after Return of the Jedi to reprise the role of Palpatine.
In an interview, he stated, "When we were doing Return of the Jedi there was a rumor that George Lucas had nine films in his head, and he'd clearly just completed three of them."
McDiarmid added, "Someone said that, 'Oh, I think what he might do next is go back in time, and show how Vader came to be.'
It never occurred to me in a million years that I would be involved in that, because I thought, 'oh well, then he'll get a much younger actor to play Palpatine.
That would be obvious."
However, "I was the right age, ironically, for the first prequel when it was made. ...
So I was in the very strange and rather wonderful paradox of playing myself when young at my own age, having played myself previously when 100-and-I-don't-know-what.
"Palpatine's role in the prequel films required McDiarmid to play two dimensions of the same character.
Recalling the initial days of shooting The Phantom Menace, McDiarmid stated, "Stepping onto the set of Episode I for the first time was like going back in time, due to my experience in Jedi.
Palpatine's an interesting character
; he's conventional on the outside, but demonic on the inside — he's on the edge, trying to go beyond what's possible."
McDiarmid added another layer to the character in Attack of the Clones.
He noted, "[Palpatine] is a supreme actor.
He has to be even more convincing than somebody who isn't behaving in a schizophrenic fashion, so he's extra charming, or extra professional — and for those who are looking for clues, that's almost where you can see them."
McDiarmid illuminated on the scene where Padmé Amidala is almost assassinated:
There's a moment in one scene of the new film where tears almost appear in his eye.
These are crocodile tears, but for all those in the movie, and perhaps watching the movie itself, they'll see he is apparently moved — and of course, he is.
He can just do it.
He can, as it were, turn it on.
And I suppose for him, it's also a bit of a turn-on —
the pure exercise of power is what he's all about.
That's the only thing he's interested in and the only thing that can satisfy him — which makes him completely fascinating to play, because it is an evil soul.
He is more evil than the devil.
At least Satan fell — he has a history, and it's one of revenge.

In Revenge of the Sith, McDiarmid played a darker interpretation of the character.
He explained that "when you're playing a character of solid blackness, that in itself is very interesting, in the sense that you have no other motivation other than the accumulation of power.
It's not so much about not having a moral center, it's just that the only thing that mattered is increasing power."
He admitted, "I've been trying to find a redeeming feature to Palpatine, and the only one I've got so far is that he's clearly a patron of the arts because he goes to the opera."
McDiarmid compared the character to Iago from William Shakespeare's Othello:
Everything he does is an act of pure hypocrisy, and that's interesting to play.
I suppose it's rather like playing Iago.
All the characters in the play — including Othello until the end — think that "Honest Iago" is a decent guy doing his job, and he's quite liked.
But at the same time there's a tremendous evil subconscious in operation.

McDiarmid noticed that the script for Revenge of the Sith demanded more action from his character than in previous films.
Lightsaber combat was a challenge to the 60-year-old actor, who, like his costars, took fencing lessons.
The close-up shots and non-acrobatic sequences of the duel between Palpatine and Mace Windu were performed by McDiarmid.
Advanced fencing and acrobatic stunts were executed by McDiarmid's doubles, Michael Byrne, Sebastian Dickins, and Bob Bowles.
McDiarmid's performance as Palpatine was generally well received by critics.
Todd McCarthy of Variety commented, "Entertaining from start to finish and even enthralling at times, 'Sith' has some acting worth writing home about, specifically McDiarmid's dominant turn as the mastermind of the evil empire."

Ed Halter of The Village Voice wrote that "Ian McDiarmid's unctuous Emperor turns appropriately vampiric as he attempts to draw Anakin into the Sith fold with promises of eternal life."
Still, his performance was not without detractors; David Edelstein of Slate critiqued, "McDiarmid isn't the subtlest of satanic tempters.
With his lisp and his clammy little leer, he looks like an old queen keen on trading an aging butt-boy (Count Dooku) for fresh meat — which leaves Anakin looking more and more like a 15-watt bulb.
"
McDiarmid had expressed interest in reprising the role of Palpatine in the planned Star Wars: Underworld TV series, which remains un-produced, but according to Cory Barlog, would have depicted the character as "a sympathetic figure who was wronged by this fucking heartless woman.
She's this hardcore gangster, and she just totally destroyed him as a person.
"In
the 2019 film The Rise of Skywalker, the ninth episode in the Skywalker saga
, McDiarmid returned to the role of Palpatine on screen for the first time since Revenge of the Sith.
McDiarmid spoke of the process behind Palpatine's first scene in the film:
...the first thing I had to do — not everybody has a script — was when my voice was off screen, as Kylo Ren was coming into my lair.
So I had this microphone that we called the "God mic.
"
Yes, it means it sounds like God and
everyone can hear it in the recording studio in this vast soundstage.
So everyone there heard my voice come back after all that time
and it was a great moment.

McDiarmid was surprised to learn of the filmmakers' decision to bring back Palpatine, given the character died in Return of the Jedi.
The film's director, J.J. Abrams, spoke of Palpatine's inclusion in the sequel trilogy: "...when you look at this as nine chapters of a story, perhaps the weirder thing would be if Palpatine didn't return.
You just look at what he talks about, who he is, how important he is, what the story is — strangely, his absence entirely from the third trilogy would be conspicuous".
On Palpatine's portrayal in the film, McDiarmid said, "he's fairly physically impaired, but his mind is as sharp as ever."
===
Make-up and costumes ===
Transforming McDiarmid into Emperor Palpatine in Return of the Jedi required extensive makeup.
McDiarmid remarked in an interview with Star Wars Insider, "Yes—that was a four-hour job, initially, although we got it down to about two-and-a-half in the end.
But this was just a little bit of latex here and there, a little bit of skin-scrunching."
Film critic Roger Ebert wrote that the Emperor "looks uncannily like Death in The Seventh Seal," and film historian Robin Wood compares him to the hag from Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs (1937).
McDiarmid remarked, "When my face changes in [Revenge of the Sith], my mind went back to the early silent movie of The Phantom of the Opera with Lon Chaney."
Conversely, he required little makeup in The Phantom Menace and Attack of the Clones.
He recalled, "I'm ... slightly aged [in AotC].
In the last film, I had a fairly standard make-up on, but now, they're starting to crinkle my face.
"Palpatine's wardrobe in the prequels, tailored by costume designer Trisha Biggar, played an important part in the development of the character.
In Attack of the Clones, explained McDiarmid, "The costumes ... have got much more edge to them, I think, than the mere senator had in The Phantom Menace.
So we see the trappings of power.
"
On Revenge of the Sith, McDiarmid said that "To wear the costumes as the character I play is wonderfully empowering."
McDiarmid's favorite costume in the film was a high-collared jacket that resembles snake or lizard skin.
He stated that "it just feels reptilian, which is exactly right for [Palpatine]."
According to Biggar, the character's costumes proved the most daunting challenge.
She said, "His six costumes get progressively darker and more ornately decorated throughout the movie.
He wears greys and browns, almost going to black, taking him toward the dark side.
"In
The Rise of Skywalker, Palpatine is unable to move without the aid of a large machine, to which he is attached.
He is depicted as having eyes without pupils and rotting hands.
Costume designer Michael Kaplan opted to dress Palpatine in a utilitarian black robe, which he wears for the majority of the film.
At the end of the film, Palpatine rejuvenates himself using the Force and becomes physically mobile.
He dons a new costume — a formal robe with red velvet — which Kaplan refers to as "his true Emperor's garb".

==
In popular culture ==
With the premiere of Return of the Jedi and the prequel films and the accompanying merchandising campaign, Palpatine became an icon in American popular culture.
Kenner/Hasbro produced and marketed a series of action figures of the character from 1983 to 2005.
According to John Shelton Lawrence and Robert Jewett, "These action figures allow children ('4 & up') to handle the symbols of the Force."

Academics have debated the relationship of Palpatine to modern culture.
Religion scholars Ross Shepard Kraemer, William Cassidy, and Susan Schwartz compare Palpatine and Star Wars heroes to the theological concept of dualism.
They insist, "One can certainly picture the evil emperor in Star Wars as Satan, complete with his infernal powers, leading his faceless minions such as his red-robed Imperial Guards."
Lawrence and Jewett argue that Vader killing Palpatine in Return of the Jedi represented "the permanent subduing of evil".
However, according to director J. J. Abrams, Palpatine's return in The Rise of Skywalker represented the idea that victory against evil is not always permanent.
He said, "I think the idea that if we are not careful, the evil — the ultimate evil — will rise again.
"Since
Return of the Jedi and the prequel films, Palpatine's name has been invoked as a caricature in politics.
A Seattle Post-Intelligencer editorial noted that anti-pork bloggers were caricaturing West Virginia Senator Robert Byrd as "the Emperor Palpatine of pork", with Senator Ted Stevens of Alaska having "clear aspirations to be his Darth Vader.
"
The charge followed a report that linked a secret hold on the Federal Funding Accountability and Transparency Act of 2006 to the two senators.
Politicians have made comparisons as well.
In 2005, Democratic Senator Frank Lautenberg of New Jersey compared Republican Majority Leader Bill Frist of Tennessee to Palpatine in a speech on the Senate floor, complete with a visual aid.
A Fox News editorial stated "no cultural icon can exist without someone trying to stuff it into a political ideology.
The Star Wars saga, the greatest pop culture icon of the last three decades, is no exception...
Palpatine's dissolution of the Senate in favor of imperial rule has been compared to Julius Caesar's marginalization of the Roman Senate, Hitler's power-grab as chancellor, and FDR's court-packing scheme and creation of the Imperial Presidency."
===
On the Internet ===
After Disney's purchase of Lucasfilm in 2012 and the sequel trilogy's success in the mid-late 2010s, the character became the subject of various internet memes, emphasizing certain lines of dialogue the character spoke in Star Wars:
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith.
==
Footnotes ==


==
References ==
Citations
Works cited


==
Further reading ==
Anderson, Kevin J., and Daniel Wallace.
The Essential Chronology.
New York: Del Rey, 2000.
ISBN 0-345-43439-0.

Bortolin, Matthew.
The Dharma of Star Wars.
Somerville, Mass.:
Wisdom Publications, 2005.
ISBN 0-86171-497-0.

Feeney, Mark.
Nixon at the Movies: A Book about Belief.
Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 2004.
ISBN 0-226-23968-3.

Hanson, Michael J., and Max S. Kay.
Star Wars:
The New Myth.
Philadelphia: Xlibris, 2002.
ISBN 1-4010-3989-8.

Horne, Michael Allen.
Dark Empire Sourcebook.
Honesdale, Penn.:
West End Games, 1993.
ISBN 0-87431-194-2.

Jensen, Hans, and Richard Chasemore.
Star Wars: Complete Locations.
New York: DK Publishing, 2005.
ISBN 0-7566-1419-8.

Luceno, James.
Star Wars:
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith: The Visual Dictionary.
New York: DK Publishing, 2005.
ISBN 0-7566-1128-8.

Lyden, John. "
The Apocalyptic Cosmology of Star Wars."
Journal of Religion and Film 4
(No.
1, April 2000):
online.

Peña, Abel G.
"Evil Never Dies: The Sith Dynasties."
Star Wars Insider 88 (June 2006).

Reynolds, David West.
Episode
I:
The Visual Dictionary New York: DK Publishing, 1999.
ISBN 0-7894-4701-0.

Reynolds, David West.
Star Wars: Attack of the Clones: The Visual Dictionary.
New York: DK Publishing, 2002.
ISBN 0-7894-8588-5.

Smith, Jeffrey A. "Hollywood Theology:
The Commodification of Religion in Twentieth-Century Films."
Religion and American Culture 11
(No.
2, Summer 2001): pp.
191–231.

Velasco, Raymond L. A Guide to the Star Wars Universe.
New York: Del Rey, 1984.
ISBN 0-345-31920-6.

Wallace, Daniel.
The New Essential Guide to Characters.
New York: Del Rey, 2002.
ISBN 0-345-44900-2.

Wallace, Daniel, and Kevin J. Anderson.
The New Essential Chronology.
New York: Del Rey, 2005.
ISBN 0-345-44901-0.
==
External links ==
Emperor Palpatine/Darth Sidious in the StarWars.com Databank
Darth Sidious on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Emperor Palpatine on IMDb
The Clone Wars are a series of fictional conflicts in the Star Wars franchise by George Lucas.
Though mentioned briefly in the first Star Wars film (A New Hope, 1977), the war itself was not depicted until Attack of the Clones (2002) and Revenge of the Sith (2005).
The Clone Wars are also the setting for three eponymous projects:
a 2D animated series (2003–2005), a CGI film (2008), and a 3D CGI series (2008–2014, 2020).
They have featured in numerous Star Wars books and games.

Within the Star Wars narrative, the Clone Wars involve a three-year war fought to prevent thousands of planetary systems from seceding from the Galactic Republic and forming the "Confederacy of Independent Systems", often referred to as "the Separatists".
The Republic uses an army of clone troopers, the namesake of the conflict, led by the Jedi Order against the Separatist battle droid army.
The conflict was manufactured as a scheme for the Republic's Supreme Chancellor Palpatine, secretly an evil Sith lord, to gain power and ultimately to convert the democratic Galactic Republic into the autocratic Galactic Empire, which was controlled through means of a military–industrial complex and featured in the original trilogy.

Lucas used the Clone Wars narrative to answer questions about the original trilogy, such as how the Empire originated and how Anakin Skywalker became Darth Vader.
The political and military events of the Clone Wars draw inspiration from real-world conflicts and historical events, such as the French Revolution and Napoleonic Wars, World War II and the American Civil War.

==
Concept and development ==
The first reference to the Clone Wars is in Star Wars creator George Lucas' third draft of the first film, which mentions the grizzled cyborg General Kenobi's "diary of the Clone Wars".
The wars were mentioned twice briefly in the final version of the film, referring to Obi-Wan Kenobi as a general who served Leia Organa's father during the conflict.
In drafting The Empire Strikes Back (1980), Lucas considered introducing a clone character who had been involved with the Clone Wars.
Leigh Brackett's first draft of the film initially developed Lando Calrissian as a clone from a planet of clones involved in the Clone Wars mentioned in A New Hope and were nearly made extinct by the war.
Boba Fett was also considered as from a group of shocktroopers nearly wiped out by Jedi during the Clone Wars.
However, these concepts were not included in the final version of the film.
Lucas was more guarded about the details of the Clone Wars than any other element of Star Wars, even making them off-limits to licensed products and books.
Lucas has noted that Palpatine's rise to power is similar to that of Adolf Hitler in Nazi Germany; as Chancellor of Germany, the latter was granted "emergency powers", as is Palpatine.
Lucas has also said that one of the primary influences for the political backdrop behind the Clone Wars, and all of Star Wars, was the Vietnam War and Watergate scandal era, when leaders embraced corruption for what they thought was the best course of action.
In 2002, Lucas said:

All democracies turn into dictatorships—but not by coup.
The people give their democracy to a dictator, whether it's Julius Caesar or Napoleon or Adolf Hitler.
Ultimately, the general population goes along with the idea.
What kinds of things push people and institutions in this direction?
That's the issue I've been exploring: how did the Republic turn into the Empire?
...
How does a good person go bad, and how does a democracy become a dictatorship?

The clone forces shown at the conclusion of Attack of the Clones comprised the largest digital army created for a film at that point.
Lucas proposed to concept artists that Revenge of the Sith would open with a montage of seven battles on seven planets.
Lucas then radically re-organized the plot; instead of opening the film with various Clone Wars battles, Lucas decided instead to focus on Anakin Skywalker.
The absence of the "seven battles on seven planets" in part led to Lucas's decision to launch the CGI-animated Clone Wars television series; Lucas said the cartoon could "do better" at depicting the conflict.

== Depiction ==
The Clone Wars was first depicted in Attack of the Clones, the release of which brought an end to Lucas's embargo on licensed material set during the era.
Numerous novels, comic books, and video games exploring the conflict have been sanctioned by Lucas Licensing.
===
Film ===
Attack of the Clones, set at the beginning of the wars, opens with the Galactic Republic's rising concern about the secession of thousands of star systems to the Confederacy of Independent Systems, which is publicly led by Count Dooku.
Chancellor Palpatine manipulates Jar Jar Binks and the rest of the Galactic Senate into granting him emergency powers.
Investigating two attempted assassinations of Senator Padmé Amidala, Obi-Wan Kenobi discovers Dooku used the identity of a dead Jedi master to secretly arrange the creation of a massive clone army on the Republic's behalf.
Yoda leads the clone army to rescue Obi-Wan, Padmé, and Anakin Skywalker from the Separatists on Geonosis, and the first battle of the war ensues.
At the battle's conclusion, Yoda declares: "Begun, the Clone War has".
In the final scene of the movie, Anakin and Padmé get married in secret, in violation of Anakin's Jedi vows.

Revenge of the Sith shows the waning days of the three-year Clone Wars, in which clone soldiers and their Jedi generals have fought against the Separatist droid army.
After killing Dooku and rescuing Palpatine from the Separatists during their assault on Coruscant, Anakin learns Padmé is pregnant.
He becomes troubled by visions of her death in childbirth, and Palpatine lures Anakin to the dark side of the Force by promising to teach him how to prevent her premature demise.
Meanwhile, Yoda is dispatched to Kashyyyk to stave off a Separatist invasion, and Obi-Wan Kenobi is dispatched to Utapau where he kills General Grievous.
Anakin discovers Palpatine is a Sith Lord, but he defends him against Mace Windu because he needs Palpatine's knowledge to save Padmé.
After Palpatine murders Windu, he dubs Anakin his new apprentice Darth Vader.
Palpatine orders the clone troopers to execute Order 66, and clones kill their Jedi generals across the galaxy.
Palpatine then dispatches Vader to kill the Separatist leaders on Mustafar and to issue a "shutdown command" to their droid army.
With their demise, Palpatine declares an end to the Clone Wars and the Republic's reformation into the Galactic Empire.

===
Animation ===
The 2D-animated Clone Wars series (2003–2005) depicts several Clone Wars battles and was meant to generate interest in Revenge of the Sith.
It also depicts the prelude to the opening battle of Revenge of the Sith and Palpatine's capture by General Grievous.

Several years later, Lucas chose to reboot the series as a 3D CGI series developed by Dave Filoni.
After several years of production on the new television series, Lucas decided to spin off the first four episodes as a standalone film.
The film, released in 2008, introduces Ahsoka Tano as Anakin's apprentice and depicts the Republic and the Separatists battling and attempting to gain permission to travel through Jabba the Hutt's territory.

The television series that followed (2008-2014, 2020) is likewise set against the backdrop of the Clone Wars, with the series finale taking place at the same time as the climax of Revenge of the Sith.
The show offers additional details about the clone army's creation, establishes each of the clones as distinct characters, depicts numerous confrontations and developments from the conflict, and portrays the interaction between the clone troopers and their Jedi commanders.
For example, the series reveals that each clone has an "inhibitor chip" in his body that makes most of them obey Order 66.

===
Novels ===
The 2008 novelization of The Clone Wars by Karen Traviss begins a series of five novels by Traviss and Karen Miller published by Del Rey Books between 2008 and 2010.
The Clone Wars: Wild Space (2008) was written by Miller and focuses on Obi-Wan and Bail Organa.
Traviss returned to write The Clone Wars: No Prisoners (2009), in which Ahsoka is temporarily assigned to Captain Rex.
Finally, Miller wrote the two-part Clone Wars Gambit (2010), subtitled Stealth and Siege, which deals with a bioweapon threat by Neimoidian general Lok Durd.
Dark Disciple (2015) novelizes a story arc about Asajj Ventress and Quinlan Vos from eight unfinished episodes of The Clone Wars.
Catalyst:
A Rogue One Novel (2016) is set during the Clone Wars and the subsequent couple of years.
Thrawn: Alliances (2018) features flashbacks to the last year of the war featuring Anakin, Padmé, and Thrawn.

===
Comics ===
Dark Horse Comics published various comics set during the era, many of which were collected in a series of trade paperbacks over nine volumes.
Dark Horse also published a ten-volume graphic novella series titled Clone Wars – Adventures (2004–07), utilizing the style of the 2D animated series and depicting original stories set during the era.
A series of comics tying into the 3D animated series was released from 2008 to 2010, collected in three volumes, and was supplemented by an 11-volume series of graphic novellas released between 2008 and 2013.

The Kanan (sometimes subtitled The Last Padawan)
comic series depicts the Star Wars Rebels character Kanan Jarrus as Jedi Padawan Caleb Dume during the conflict.

===
Video games ===
LucasArts also produced video games like Republic Commando and The Clone Wars that depict the Clone Wars.

==
Analysis ==
Comparisons have been made between the political aspects of the Clone Wars and the events leading up to World War II.
Radio host Clyde Lewis' article on historical similarities in Star Wars claims that Palpatine's tactics parallel those of Adolf Hitler and Nazi Germany; both leaders used wars and scapegoats to manipulate society's emotional state, thus providing the leadership with support and power.
Another writer compares the Clone Wars with World War II in general, basing his argument on the fact that Lucas was a baby boomer, and the dark times featured in the original trilogy rival the dark, uncertain Cold War.
Referring to Lucas's statements that the conflict in Star Wars was inspired by the cultural backdrop of the Vietnam War, journalist Chris Taylor said the Clone Wars are a parallel to World War II.
Anne Lancashire from the University of Toronto also points out some similar nomenclature between the Clone Wars and the American Civil War.
Several publications compared the political context of the Clone Wars to the Iraq War.
In claiming that the Star Wars galaxy under the deceitful Palpatine parallels the modern issues of the United States, an editorial on Antiwar.com states that Star Wars "establishes first the generally agreeable premise that it's right to overthrow oppressive government, before bringing into focus something more discomforting – that the corrupt tyranny referred to is our own".
Additionally, an article from Wiretap claims that "like Palpatine, the Bush administration has been able to feed on people's fears to gain more power".
Lucas stated that the Iraq war "didn't exist" when he developed the Clone Wars, but he did see parallels between the Vietnam War that inspired Star Wars and the war in Iraq.
Star Wars producer Rick McCallum corroborated that the Clone Wars was developed before the Iraq War, adding that Lucas "is a product of Vietnam".

==
Impact and critical response ==
The author of How Star Wars Conquered the Universe, Chris Taylor, calls the Clone Wars "a major part of Star Wars lore".
In its attempt to keep its Star Wars line of toys active after Return of the Jedi (1983), Kenner devised a storyline that would involve the return of an exiled "genetic terrorist" and his Clone Warriors.
Timothy Zahn said the clones' unexpected appearance fighting for "the good guys" in Attack of the Clones—despite many years of fan speculation that the clones were an invading force—was "wonderfully blindsid[ing]".
After seeing the CGI Clone Wars television show, Zahn was grateful that Lucasfilm rejected his initial Heir to the Empire draft, which involved an insane clone of Obi-Wan created during the conflict.

==
See also ==
List of Star Wars Clone Wars characters


==
References ==
Footnotes
Citations
===
Works cited ===


==
Further reading ==
Sword Fighting in the Star Wars Universe:
Historical Origins, Style and Philosophy by Nick Jamilla (McFarland & Company, 2008)
Star Wars and History by Nancy Reagin & Janice Liedl
(John Wiley & Sons, 2012)
The Science Fiction Reboot: Canon, Innovation and Fandom in Refashioned Franchises by Heather Urbanski (McFarland & Company, 2013)
Star wars: the essential chronology by Kevin J. Anderson & Daniel Wallace (Ballantine Books, 2000)
Culture, identities, and technology in the Star wars films: essays on the two trilogies by Carl Silvio & Tony M. Vinci (McFarland & Company, 2007)
The Star Wars Heresies by Paul F. McDonald (McFarland & Company, 2013)


==
External links ==
Clone Wars on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
The  First Galactic Empire is a fictional autocracy featured in the Star Wars franchise.
It was first introduced in the 1977 film Star Wars and appears in its two sequels:
The Empire Strikes Back (1980) and Return of the Jedi (1983).
It is the main antagonistic faction of the original trilogy.
The government collapses a year following the conclusion of the Galactic Civil War in Return of the Jedi, and the First Order is formed by Imperial remnants.
An oppressive, autocratic regime with a complicated bureaucracy, the Galactic Empire seeks to ensure singular rule and social control over every planet and civilization within the galaxy.

At its peak, the Galactic Empire sprawls over much of the known Star Wars galaxy, which consists of millions of star systems and billions more fringe colonies, shipyards, fortress worlds, and outer territories.
The Empire's origins are depicted in the prequel Star Wars:
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith (2005), where it replaces the Galactic Republic at the end of the Clone Wars orchestrated by Sheev Palpatine, who was then the Republic's Supreme Chancellor.
Palpatine is also secretly a Dark Lord of the Sith named Darth Sidious, intending to purge the Jedi and restore the Sith Empire to power.

Palpatine falsely accuses the Jedi of causing the Clone Wars, a secessionist war, to weaken the Republic and gain power.
Palpatine manipulates the Galactic Senate into using clone troopers created during the conflict to kill the Jedi.
After engineering these threats himself, Palpatine reorganizes the Republic into a state that could "ensure the security and continuing stability, and [provide] a safe and secure society" – a galactic empire with himself as its Emperor.
The Senate overwhelmingly applauds this decision and lauds Palpatine's apparent resolve, bravery, and selflessness.

Though Palpatine's Sith identity remains a secret to all but a handful of individuals, his apprentice, the Sith Lord Darth Vader maintains a more public presence, acting as a personification of the Empire's power.
By the time of Episode IV – A New Hope, the Empire has transformed into an authoritarian regime, opposed by the Alliance to Restore the Republic.
The completion of the Death Star, a doomsday weapon, allows Palpatine to dissolve the powerless Imperial Senate.
The Galactic Empire is described and portrayed in various Star Wars media as an arrogant and brutal dictatorship, one based on "anthropocentrism, nationalization, state terrorism, xenophobia, enslavement and genocide of non-humans, power projection, threat of lethal force, and, above all else, constant fear".

==
Appearances ==
Star Wars (1977)
The Empire Strikes Back (1980)
Return of the Jedi (1983)
Star Wars:
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith (2005)
Rogue One:
A Star Wars Story (2016)
Solo:
A Star Wars Story (2018)
Star Wars Rebels (2014–2018)
The Mandalorian (2019–present)
Star Wars:
The Bad Batch (2021)


==
Themes ==
Star Wars creator George Lucas sought to make the First Galactic Empire aesthetically and thematically similar to Nazi Germany and to appear to be fascist.
Similar to Nazi Germany, the Galactic Empire is a dictatorship based on rigid control of society that dissolved a previous democracy and is led by an all-powerful supreme ruler.
The Empire, like the Nazis, desires the creation of totalitarian order and utilizes excessive force and violence to achieve their ends.
The name of the Empire's main soldiers, the stormtroopers, is somewhat similar to the name given to Hitler's Sturmabteilung (SA, "storm department") paramilitary bodyguards.
The visual appearance of Darth Vader in his all-black uniform combined with his devout obedience to the Emperor has allusion to the black-uniformed Nazi Schutzstaffel (SS).
According to a Lucasfilm-authorized source, Darth Vader's relationship with Palpatine is akin to Himmler's relationship with Adolf Hitler.
The uniforms of Imperial military officers also bear resemblance to uniforms used in Nazi Germany as well as 19th century Polish ulans (mounted lancers)—who wore a tunic,
riding breeches, and boots like the Empire's officers wear—as well as the Imperial officers' cap resembling the field caps historically worn by German and Austrian troops.
In addition to Nazi Germany, there was also at least one portion of the Galactic Empire that was based on the Soviet Union, which is the various military personnel and TIE Fighters that are flying in formation as Palpatine arrives on the Death Star in Return of the Jedi.
According to Lucas, that the ceremony for the Emperor's arrival was inspired by May Day military parades in the Soviet Union.
Lucas has also indicated that the Galactic Empire's struggle against a smaller guerilla force was inspired by America's involvement in the Vietnam War and his surprise at how few people spoke up against the war.
Palpatine's rise to power, and transforming a democracy into a dictatorship has been related to those of Julius Caesar, Augustus, Napoleon Bonaparte, and Adolf Hitler.
Palpatine's consolidation of power and declaring himself emperor is like the Roman political figure
Octavian (later renamed Augustus), in that Octavian manipulated the Roman Senate as Palpatine did with the Galactic Senate; he legitimized authoritarian rule by saying that corruption in the Senate was hampering the powers of the head of state; he pressured the Roman Senate to give him extraordinary powers as Consul of the Republic to deal with a crisis and he falsely claimed that he would rescind those powers once the crisis was over; and, like the transition of the Roman Republic into the Roman Empire, Octavian, like Palpatine, relied on his strong control over military force.

== Depiction ==


===
Origins ===
The Galactic Empire was born out of the collapsing Galactic Republic.
However, its seeds are planted during the Clone Wars, the epic war between the Republic and the separatist Confederacy of Independent Systems (CIS) depicted in Episode II: Attack of the Clones and Episode III: Revenge of the Sith.
Because of a corrupt senate, and a civil war, Palpatine was easily able to take control over the Republic.

In Episode I: The Phantom Menace, amid a trade dispute and invasion of his home world, Senator Palpatine convinces Queen Padmé Amidala to call for a vote of no confidence in Supreme Chancellor of the Republic Finis Valorum.
Palpatine is elected Supreme Chancellor.
As fighting intensifies in Episode II, the Galactic Senate, the legislature of the Republic, grants Palpatine emergency powers to deal with the crisis.
Palpatine promises to return his powers once peace and order is restored.
His first order is to create a massive army of clone troopers.
He exploits the Clone Wars to amass political power, and, by the time of Episode III, he is effectively a dictator.

The Jedi distrust Palpatine's motives, fearing he has come under the influence of a Dark Lord of the Sith named Darth Sidious.
Their concerns are shared by several senators, who suspect Palpatine may not return his emergency powers.
Among them are two who had long supported Palpatine:
Padmé Amidala and Bail Organa.

The film eventually reveals that Palpatine and Sidious are one and the same, and Palpatine engineered the conflicts as a false flag.

Palpatine reveals himself as a Sith Lord to Jedi Knight Anakin Skywalker, promising to save Padmé and her unborn child.
Skywalker reports Palpatine's true identity to the Jedi.
However, when Jedi Master Mace Windu confronts Palpatine, Skywalker comes to Palpatine's aid and helps him kill Windu.
Knowing that his involvement in Windu's death will cause him to be expelled from the Jedi Order, Skywalker is left with no choice but to become Palpatine's third apprentice, Darth Vader.
Palpatine declares the Jedi to be traitors and all but exterminates the Jedi Order in a massive galaxy-wide slaughter.
Secure in his power and position, Palpatine reorganizes the Republic into the Galactic Empire, with himself as Emperor for life.
The Senate enthusiastically supports Palpatine, although a few senators, like Padmé and Bail Organa, see through the plot.
Two remaining Jedi, Obi-Wan Kenobi and Yoda, mount a counterattack.
Obi-Wan defeats Vader and leaves him for dead, but Yoda's duel with Palpatine ends in a stalemate and he is forced to flee for his life; both Jedi are forced to go into exile.
Grievously wounded, Vader is rescued by Palpatine and fitted with cybernetics and a black suit of armor with a life support system.
Padme's children, with their mother dead and their father a Sith Lord, are placed into adoptive families.

===
Government ===
With the end of the Clone Wars, the purge of the Jedi Order and the formation of the First Galactic Empire, Palpatine rules with absolute power as Emperor.
Between the events of Revenge of the Sith and A New Hope, Palpatine rules the galaxy from the confines of his heavily guarded Imperial Palace on Coruscant, once known as the Jedi Temple.

Coruscant was introduced in Timothy Zahn's then-canon novel Heir to the Empire.

Its film debut was in the special edition of Return of the Jedi.

Inspiration for the world-spanning city came from 1940s science fiction works, especially Isaac Asimov's Trantor.

Visually, it resembles the Art Deco skyscrapers of Manhattan.
Star Wars Battlefront II depicts Palpatine as intentionally having no clear line of succession, desiring either immortality or the destruction of the Empire.

Lord Darth Vader is the Emperor's ruthless chief enforcer, greatly feared throughout the galaxy; a command from Vader is to be considered a command from Palpatine.
Darth Vader and the Inquisitors are routinely given control over Imperial assets but lay outside the traditional chain of command; they travel extensively to most of the galactic regions to enforce the Emperor's rule and exterminate nearly every Jedi survivor of the purge.
His personal Imperial armada—the 501st Legion and Death Squadron—participate in the capture of Princess Leia Organa, the Battle of Hoth and the Battle of Endor.

The Senate, now known as the Imperial Senate, nominally continues to exist, though it is virtually powerless.
Palpatine dissolves the Senate (off-camera) in A New Hope after discovering that several members of the Senate are founding members of the Rebellion.
Aside from Palpatine, power resides in the hands of "Administrators" (planetary governors), the "Moffs" (sector governors) and the "Grand Moffs" (oversector governors).
Through this chain of command, Palpatine dictates direct control over all population centers.

Grand Moff is a political title in the hierarchy of the Galactic Empire.
Governor Wilhuff Tarkin suggests the creation of the role and becomes the first ever Grand Moff.

===
Military ===


====
Notable Officers ====
Grand Moff Tarkin- Head of the Death Star construction after Krennic's death, until it was destroyed with him on board.

Grand Admiral Thrawn- Commander of the Seventh Fleet of the Imperial Navy, until being MIA upon his defeat in the liberation of Lothal.

Director Orson
Krennic- One of the directors of the Death Star until Scarif was destroyed by the Empire to kill all the rebels on the planet, with him included.
Krennic was also the Head of Advanced Weapons research.

Grand Vizier Mas Amedda - Vice chair of the Galactic Senate.
He is Grand Vizier and head of the Imperial Ruling Council, and in Aftermath:
Life Debt, is installed by Gallius Rax as the puppet leader of the Empire following Palpatine's death.
Amedda formally surrenders the Empire to the New Republic in Aftermath:
Empire's End.
====
Tarkin Doctrine ====
In Star Wars, the Tarkin Doctrine was the plan presented by Grand Moff Tarkin to Emperor Palpatine in 18 BBY that outlined the Empire's goal and structure:
bringing order to the galaxy and restoring rule of law to sectors overtaken by piracy and organized crime, ending destructive conflicts through grand strategy and military doctrine, a plan for maximizing social control and propaganda, maintaining economic order and increasing security in the Galactic Empire.
Tarkin believed the chief factor that contributed most to the demise of the Republic was not, in fact, the war, but rampant self-interest... and in the end, left the body politic feckless and corrupt.

Consider the self-interest of the Core Worlds, unwavering in their exploitation of the Outer Systems for their resources; the Outer Systems themselves, undermined, by their permissive disregard of smuggling and slavery; those ambitious members of the Senate who sought only status and opportunity.
By partitioning the galaxy into regions, we, The Empire, actually achieve a unity previously absent; where once our loyalties and allegiances were divided, they now serve one being, with one goal: a cohesive galaxy in which everyone prospers.
For the first time in one thousand generations our sector governors will not be working solely to enrich Coruscant and the Core Worlds, but to advance the quality of life in the star systems that make up each sector — keeping the spaceways safe, maintaining open and accessible communications, assuring that tax revenues are properly levied and allocated to improving the infrastructure.

The plan which Palpatine ultimately had implemented in its entirety contained three main principles: territorial consolidation, rapid communication and coercive diplomacy.
Tarkin's concept was that rule could be established and maintained "through fear of force rather than force itself", and he believed grand display of power—when combined with oppressive means of terrorizing communities—could suppress dissent and rebellion into submission.
This Doctrine became the Empire's core military doctrine of peacekeeping, internal security, counter-insurgency, and state terrorism-philosophy.
The instrument of this power is the military, which includes the Imperial stormtroopers, a massive fleet of 25,000 Star Destroyers, 50 Super Star Destroyers, and the Death Star, a moon-sized superweapon capable of destroying entire planets.
Plans for the Death Star first appear (in universe chronology) in Attack of the Clones and construction
begins at the end of Revenge of the Sith.
Summarized measures set forth by the Tarkin Doctrine:

Establish "Oversectors" which contain tumultuous systems; to monitor and react to rebellious activities within those systems.
Oversectors would be formed without regard for the borders of standard sectors and would receive more forces than other regions of the Empire.
This Imperial presence would be designed to stop small rebel factions before they could become a larger established threat.
An average of three Sector Groups would be deployed in an Oversector.

Assign command of each Oversector to a single individual who reports directly to the Emperor, in order to eliminate any delays created by political opportunism by Imperial advisors.

Improve communication resources and Imperial response time by placing modified HoloNet transceivers (cannibalized from existing HoloNet transceivers) aboard each flagship of every Sector Group within an Oversector command.
Place similar facilities aboard the Emperor's flagship and in Imperial City on Imperial Centre (formally Coruscant).

Control unruly portions of the Galaxy through a fear of force rather than force itself.
Through the combination of superior coordination of multiple Oversector groups and the control of information (news media)
an impression of overwhelming force will be installed within the citizenry, thereby instilling the idea that resistance is futile.

Continue to research and develop new and more powerful starships and weapons designed to inspire fear in the resistant systems.
Present the citizen with a weapon so powerful, so immense as to defy all conceivable attack against it, a weapon invulnerable and invincible in battle, that shall become a symbol for the Empire.
This weapon must possess a power great enough to dispatch an entire system.
Only a handful or one of these weapons would be required to accomplish this task.

====
Imperial Naval Command ====
The Imperial Naval Command (INC), also referred to as the Imperial Starfleet, is the military arm of the Galactic Empire in charge of maintaining security, peace and order in the galaxy.
Commanded by Darth Vader, it absorbed the military forces of the Galactic Republic after Palpatine's declaration of the New Order.
Organization of the Imperial Navy is assigned to the Moffs.

At its peak, the Imperial Navy fields millions of warships, including an estimated 25,000 Star Destroyers, fulfilling the Emperor's will throughout the galaxy.
The Empire's central warship cadre is well structured and uniformed, but the Imperial Navy suffers against strike craft, largely due to the inadequacies of its own starfighters and point defense.
The Empire's focus on size, firepower, and terror comes at the expense of a well-balanced fleet.
After its defeat at the Battle of Endor, the Galactic Empire splits up into warring factions, and the Imperial Starfleet along with it.
While much of the remnants of the Imperial Navy are later reunited under impressive Imperial commanders, the military organization ceases to exist shortly after the death of the Emperor.

Specific responsibilities of the Imperial Navy include defending Imperial citizens from space-based threats (such as pirates, smugglers and rebel contingents), enforcing Imperial will, and overseeing commerce through customs and blockade operations.
The Imperial Navy also performs orbital bombardments and transports major ground force deployments, supporting them with space, orbital, and aerial support.
Imperial Navy officers wear the same standard uniform that their Army counterparts use but is colored grey, and both services use colored chest plaques to denote rank.

====
Imperial Starfighter Corps ====
The Imperial Starfighter Corps (ISC) was the starfighter pilot branch of the Galactic Empire.
Although the Corps was a component of the Navy, most pilots were assigned to ground operations with the Imperial Army.
Some Imperial starfighters include TIE (Twin Ion Engine) fighters, TIE Interceptors, TIE Defenders, TIE Strikers, TIE Silencers (by the First Order), and TIE Bombers.
The corps was scattered after the Battle of Endor (4 ABY).

====
Imperial Stormtrooper Corps ====
Imperial Stormtrooper Corps (ISC) are elite corps of rapid response all-environment shock troops—organized like the Marine Corps with their own separate divisions.
The Stormtroopers operate in conjunction with the Army Ground Troopers and Navy Marine Troopers—who were used as garrison forces—to reinforce and hold defensive positions until the regular military arrived.
When not in their signature white armor, Stormtrooper officers wear black uniforms.

===
Galactic Civil War ===
With the formation of the Empire and the purge of the Jedi now complete, martial law is immediately declared throughout the galaxy.
Those in hiding, or attempting to either flee from or oppose the New Imperial Order, are subject to persecution or death.
This is the start of the bloody decades-long Galactic Civil War fought between the Empire and the Rebel Alliance.

While Force-sensitive kyber crystals are sacred to the Jedi and are at the core of every lightsaber, the Empire explores ways to weaponize them.
They mine for kyber crystals across worlds and are thwarted twice in securing massive crystals by the Ghost crew and
Saw Gerrera.
But on Jedha they uncovered a surplus of kyber, which would be enough to power their dreaded Death Star.

The Death Star, a moon-sized battle station with sufficient firepower to destroy an entire planet, is designed to be the supreme weapon of the Empire's power.
Grand Moff Tarkin, the station's commander, shortly after informing the heads of the Imperial Military that Palpatine has dissolved the Senate, demonstrates that power in A New Hope, when he destroys Alderaan as a show of force.
In the film's climactic scene, however, the station is assaulted by a small force of Rebel starfighters who have come into possession of the station's blueprints.
The battle ends with the Death Star's destruction at the hands of Luke Skywalker, which is the Rebel Alliance's first major success against the Empire.
After three more years of conflict, the Alliance achieves a decisive victory over the Empire in Return of the Jedi.
In the film's climactic battle, the Rebellion destroys the second Death Star and a number of capital ships that contain a great portion of the Imperial Navy's highest-ranking officers.
During this battle, Vader redeems himself by killing Palpatine in order to save his son Luke Skywalker, but in this act of self-sacrifice he is himself mortally wounded in the process.
In the aftermath of Endor, the dual loss of the Emperor and the majority of decorated military leadership creates a power vacuum of chaos and instability.
The Empire is a wounded beast thrashing around in a hundred directions, causing random and wanton destruction across the galaxy.
By design, the Empire had no clear line of succession; and there was no second-in-command.
The insidious kratocratic-philosophies of the Sith ideology were engineered into the Imperial administration and have permeated military culture of the Empire's remaining upper echelon.
Revolts, infighting, fiefdoms and warlordism gradually fracture the Empire apart more effectively than any damage capable of being inflicted by the Rebel Alliance, as the Moffs and Grand Moffs maneuver to grab power for themselves amidst civil unrest.

Palpatine left posthumous orders.
Upon verification of the Emperor's death, messenger droids are sent to select Imperial officers to relay the last orders of the Emperor: to begin Operation:
Cinder at once.
Operation:
Cinder—a central piece of the late Emperor's contingency plan—tasks hardline Imperial fanatics to destroy entire planets, heedless of their former loyalties, as part of Palpatine's scorched earth policy.
Palpatine does not desire the Empire continue without his presence; if he cannot live forever as the galaxy's Emperor, he would rather see it destroyed.

If an Empire cannot protect its Emperor then that Empire must be deemed a failure.
It collapses not only because its central figure is gone, but because it must not be allowed to remain!

A year after the Battle of Endor, the bolstered Rebellion defeats the weakened Empire during the Battle of Jakku and formally establish the New Republic.

===
New Republic Era ===
By the time of The Mandalorian, set five years after the Battle of Endor, the Galactic Empire no longer exists as an official government or a major power, and is essentially a failed state being replaced by warlords and rump states competing with each other and the New Republic over the power vacuum left behind.
One Imperial remnant established a base on the planet Nevarro, where Mandalorian bounty hunter Din Djarin was hired to acquire an asset, later revealed to be a Force-sensitive infant named Grogu.
Djarin abandoned his job and decided to protect the child, making an enemy of Imperial warlord Moff Gideon and his army of mercenary stormtroopers.

Djarin later returned to Nevarro, reuniting with his allies Greef Karga and Cara Dune, as well as an unnamed Mythrol, to take down an Imperial facility to eradicate the Empire's presence on the planet.
The group soon discovered that it was housing Imperial experiments, using blood rich in midichlorians obtained from Grogu.
The group succeeded in taking down the base.
Gideon was informed of the developments while overseeing a unit of enhanced droids known as darktroopers, who would later help him capture Grogu.
Djarin led a mission to rescue Grogu, assisted by several allies include Dune, Boba Fett, Fennec Shand, and Mandalorian warrior Bo-Katan Kryze.
The group boarded Gideon's command ship and subdued him.
Djarin turned Grogu over to Luke Skywalker, who took down the Moff's darktroopers.

===
Successor ===
The most successful remnants of the Empire reforms as the First Order, led by Supreme Leader Snoke and former Imperial officers.
They become a major faction in the galaxy in The Force Awakens and face a reformed Rebel Alliance called the Resistance.
The First Order rises to power through the use of Starkiller Base, a converted planet turned into a superweapon that later destroys the Hosnian system, the location of the New Republic's capital.
Starkiller Base was later destroyed by the Resistance, but First Order forces drew them out of hiding and wiped out a majority of their fleet.
During the battle, Snoke was killed by his apprentice Kylo Ren, who assumed the title of Supreme Leader.
Aspects of the First Order would later ally with the "Final Order", led a faction of Sith cultists known as the Sith Eternal, overseen by none other than Palpatine, who had transferred his essence into an imperfect cloned body and formerly positioned himself to control the First Order over Snoke, a puppet ruler of his.
The cult was stationed on the isolated Sith planet of Exegol.
Palpatine offered Ren, who had tracked him to the planet, control of the Final Order in exchange for killing the young Jedi Rey, Palpatine's own granddaughter.
Ren initially accepted the assignment, but later abandoned his dark side identity after a duel with Rey in the wreckage of the second Death Star.
With Ren's defection, Palpatine turned command over to Allegiant General Enric Pryde, previously an Imperial officer.

With help from the spirit of Luke Skywalker, Rey eventually made her way to Exegol, guiding the Resistance fleet a way to the planet to take down the Final Order.
With help from a redeemed Ren and the spirits of Jedi past, she resisted Palpatine's promises of power and turned his own Sith lightning against him, killing the Sith Lord once and for all.
The Resistance fleet, with help from their allies across the galaxy, took down Pryde and the Sith Eternal fleet to officially wipe out the Final Order and the Galactic Empire with it, after 54 years of its existence.

===
Legends ===
With the 2012 acquisition of Lucasfilm by The Walt Disney Company, most of the licensed Star Wars novels and comics produced since the original 1977 film, known as the Expanded Universe, were rebranded as Legends and declared non-canon to the franchise in April 2014.

====
Agent of the Empire ====
Agent of the Empire is a 10-issue comic book series published by Dark Horse Comics from 2011–2013.
It was written by John Ostrander and illustrated by Stephane Roux, and is set three years before the original Star Wars film.
Two 5-issue story arcs follow an Imperial secret agent, and feature characters such as Han Solo, Princess Leia and Boba Fett.

Both arcs were collected in trade paperback volumes.

====
Jedi Prince ====
In the Jedi Prince novel series, a group of impostors calling themselves the Prophets of the Dark Side install a three-eyed mutant named Trioculus as Emperor by claiming that he is Palpatine's son, reforming the Empire (as Trioculus's Empire).
By the end of the series, Palpatine's true son, Triclops, helps the Rebels defeat this new enemy.

====
Thrawn trilogy ====
In the Thrawn trilogy book series, the New Republic is almost brought to its knees by Grand Admiral Thrawn, the new leader of the remnants of the Empire (which are known as Thrawn's Empire or Empire of the Hand) and a military genius.
By the time of the third book in the series, Thrawn has nearly defeated the New Republic, but they claim victory in a last-ditch effort, and Thrawn is killed by his own bodyguard, shattering the Empire's unity.

==== Dark Empire ====
In the Dark Empire comic book series, Palpatine is reborn in a clone body and unites most of the scattered remnants of the Empire (forming the Dark Empire), hoping to retake control of the galaxy.
By the sequel, Empire's End, he is defeated and destroyed once and for all.

====
Jedi Academy trilogy ====
In the Jedi Academy trilogy, an Imperial admiral named Daala commandeers the remainder of the Imperial Navy (the Crimson Empire) and mounts a ferocious assault on the New Republic.
She nearly succeeds in taking over the galaxy, but is foiled by New Republic pilots Wedge Antilles and Lando Calrissian in the final entry, Champions of the Force.

====
Darksaber ====
In the 1995 novel Darksaber, Admiral Daala, frustrated with the Imperial warlords in the Core fighting and bickering amongst themselves, orchestrates the warlords' deaths and unites and becomes the leader of the remaining Imperial forces.
After being defeated in battle once again by the New Republic, she resigns and selects Gilad Pellaeon (originally in the Thrawn Trilogy) as the new leader, where he becomes Grand Admiral Pellaeon.

====
New Jedi Order ====
By the time of the New Jedi Order series, the remaining Imperial military factions sign a truce with the New Republic, becoming the Imperial Remnant.
The former enemies then become allies against the invading Yuuzhan Vong.
A few years later, the Remnant help the Galactic Alliance fight an assimilating insect species known as the Killiks, and in the early Legacy era they are a third party in the Second Galactic Civil War but made peace with the Alliance and Confederation.
All three of these were represented by former Imperial commanders.

====
Legacy ====
The Star Wars: Legacy comic book series, set 127 years after the original Star Wars film, explains that, during a civil war, the New Galactic Empire known as the Fel Empire declares war on the Galactic Federation of Free Alliances (Galactic Alliance), the successor state of the New Republic, after 83 years of a cold war that began in 44 ABY.
This conflict begins the Sith-Imperial War, which after three years leads to the eventual defeat of the Galactic Alliance and the Galactic Empire asserting its domination over the galaxy once again in 130 ABY.
A few months later the Sith overthrew the Fel Empire in a coup and the Sith Lord Darth Krayt the leader of the One Sith, usurped the throne and forces Emperor Roan Fel to take refuge in the fortress planet of Bastion and the Sith renamed the Fel Empire as Darth Krayt's Galactic Empire.
In 138 ABY, the Galactic Alliance Remnant led by Admiral Gar Stazi, Fel's forces known as the Empire-in-exile led by Empress Marasiah Fel, and the New Jedi Order led by Jedi Master K'Krukk united against Darth Krayt's Galactic Empire and successfully destroyed it in the Battle of Coruscant and the three united factions then formed a new galactic government out of their organizations called the Galactic Federation Triumvirate, thus ending a grand total of 157 years of the Galactic Empire's history, as opposed to Palpatine's promised 10,000 years of rule.
The One Sith however led by Darth Wredd, remained at large and waged a war against the GFT known as the Darth Wredd's insurgency but one year later in 139 ABY, the former Empire-in-exile worked with the other two factions, killed Wredd and dissolved the One Sith.
A year later in 140 ABY, the GFT would defeat the secular alliances of the One Sith and in the aftermath of that conflict, the Galaxy had entered an era of peace and unity.

== See also ==
Isaac Asimov's Galactic Empire
Imperium of Mankind
List of Star Wars characters
Utopian and dystopian fiction
State terrorism
== Notes ==


==
References ==


==
Further reading ==


==
External links ==
Galactic Empire in the StarWars.com Databank
Galactic Empire on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
DomusPublica.net (No longer active, this archive as of September 27, 2005 has at least some of the essays intact)
The Case for the Empire, The Weekly Standard
Web.
Archive.org, "No Case for the Empire"
GalacticEmpireDatabank.com
Why did The Galactic Empire Hate Aliens?

Tarkin in the Star Wars Databank


===
Fan societies ===
The Empire Reborn - Roleplaying and gaming society (PC Games)
The Galactic Empire - Roleplaying game with strong emphasis on political and military training.

The Emperor's Hammer Strike Fleet - PC Gaming club for all Star Wars games and Star Conflict.
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars is an American computer-animated television series created by George Lucas.
The series began with a theatrical feature film which was released on August 15, 2008, and debuted on Cartoon Network two months later on October 3, 2008.
It is set in the fictional Star Wars galaxy during the three years between the prequel films
Episode II:
Attack of the Clones and Episode III: Revenge of the Sith.
Being a reboot of the previous 2D series Star Wars: Clone Wars (2003-2005), each episode had a running time of approximately 22 minutes to fill a half-hour time slot instead of the 3-15 minute episodes that the previous series had.
Dave Filoni was the supervising director of the series.
The Clone Wars was a massive ratings success, becoming one of Cartoon Network's highest rated shows during its initial run.
Throughout its run, the series received mostly positive reception from critics, receiving praise for its writing, action, characters, visuals, voice acting, music, scale and tone.
The series has also garnered a massive fan following and was also nominated for many industry awards, including the Daytime Emmy Awards and the Annie Awards.
In early 2013, Lucasfilm announced that The Clone Wars would be "winding down".
Thirteen episodes composing a new sixth season were made available in the U.S. for streaming on Netflix, along with the entirety of the series, beginning March 7, 2014.
A project known as The Clone Wars Legacy adapted unproduced story arcs into other formats, such as comics and novels.
The series was revived for a seventh and final season of 12 new episodes, which premiered on Disney+
on February 21, 2020.A sequel series, Star Wars Rebels, was released during the hiatus between the sixth and seventh seasons of The Clone Wars, featuring several characters from The Clone Wars, including Captain Rex, Ahsoka Tano and Maul.
Star Wars:
The Bad Batch, a spin-off and another sequel series centering on the titular clone trooper team introduced in the seventh season, was announced on July 13, 2020, and is set to premiere on May 4 (aka "Star Wars Day"), 2021.

==
Series overview ==


===
Setting ===
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars is set during the prequel trilogy era, in the period of three years between Attack of the Clones and Revenge of the Sith.
The series focuses on the eponymous conflict between the Galactic Republic, which is supported by the Jedi Order, and the Confederacy of Independent Systems, a movement organized by the Sith Lord Count Dooku to unite numerous planetary systems seeking independence from the Republic against it.
Unbeknowst to the galaxy, Darth Sidious, Dooku's secret master, is the one pulling the strings of both sides, as part of his master plan to eliminate the Jedi and gain enough power to create a new governing state under his rule.

The series was initially conceived as an anthology, with episodes sharing little narrative connections between them, but later seasons feature story arcs that span several episodes.
The protagonists are various characters from the live-action films, including Anakin Skywalker, Obi-Wan Kenobi, Padmé Amidala, Yoda, and Mace Windu, as well as new characters created for the series, such as Anakin's Padawan learner Ahsoka Tano, and various clone troopers who are given distinct personalities, like Captain Rex of the 501st Legion.
The antagonists are typically members of the Separatist Alliance, though numerous episodes also focus on crime lords, bounty hunters, and Force-sensitive characters (Sith or just dark side users) who are not affiliated with the Separatists.

===
Synopsis ===
Season one focuses on various battles fought between the Republic and the Separatists, and their efforts to convince more planets and races to join them.
The main antagonists are Count Dooku, his informal apprentice Asajj Ventress, and the cyborg commander of the Separatists' droid armies, General Grievous.
There are also several episodes that do not focus on the conflict with the Separatists, but rather other aspects of the Clone Wars.

Season two features both one episode-storylines, and a few arcs that span between two and five episodes.
This season focuses heavily on bounty hunter characters, with one story arc featuring Darth Sidious hiring Cad Bane to steal a holocron from the Jedi Temple on Coruscant that will help him locate Force-sensitive children, while another deals with Boba Fett beginning his bounty hunter career and, alongside a group of more experienced mercenaries, seeking revenge against Mace Windu for killing his father.
Other major story arcs focus on the planet Mandalore, which took a neutral stance in the Clone Wars and whose pacifist leader, Duchess Satine Kryze, is targeted by both the Separatists and the Mandalorian terrorist faction Death Watch; and the Jedi leading Republic forces in an assault on the main Separatist battle droid manufacturing facility on Geonosis.

The first half of both season three and four are diplomatic in nature, and focus on the role of the Republic Senate in the Clone Wars, and how different races and planets are affected by the galaxy-wide conflict, as well as the Republic's efforts to help them.
During season three, several story arcs focus on the development of certain characters, such as Anakin, who is led to an ancient Force realm alongside Obi-Wan and Ahsoka, and learns more about the nature of the Force and his role as the Chosen One; Ahsoka, who defines Anakin's orders to join his team in a mission to break a Jedi Master out of a Separatist prison, and must later lead her own team of captured Jedi Padawans when they find themselves hunted by Trandoshans; and Ventress, who is betrayed by Dooku, returns to her Nightsister clan on Dathomir, and tries to exact revenge on her former master through his new apprentice, Savage Opress, who ultimately turns on both Ventress and Dooku to follow his own path.

In season four, one story arc focuses on the 501st Legion, who must act independently for the first time when the Jedi General they have been temporarily assigned to serve under is revealed to be a traitor, and manipulates them into killing each other, forcing the clones to capture and execute him.
Other story arcs feature Obi-Wan faking his death and going undercover as a bounty hunter to thwart a plot to capture Chancellor Palpatine; Ventress abandoning her Sith ways and becoming a bounty hunter after the Separatists' massacre of the Nightsisters; and Savage finding his long-lost brother, Darth Maul, who seeks revenge against Obi-Wan for his defeat over a decade prior.

Season five features five main story arcs.
In the first one, the Republic helps a group of rebels from Onderon, led by siblings Steela and Saw Gerrera, liberate their planet from Separatist occupation.
The second arc focuses on a group of Jedi younglings who, after completing their path to becoming Padawans, have to prove themselves by rescuing Ahsoka from pirates.
The third arc revolves around a team of droids who, while undertaking a mission to intercept an encrypted Separatist message, encounter an amnesiac former clone commando and must help him recover his memories to escape the planet they have been stranded on.
The fourth arc deals with the return of Darth Maul, who joins forces with Death Watch and other criminal syndicates to take over Mandalore and exact revenge on Obi-Wan.
The final arc features Ahsoka being framed for bombing the Jedi Temple, and having to prove her innonence while on the run from the Republic.
Though she is ultimately cleared of the charges against her after Anakin captures the real culprit, Ahsoka elects to abandon the Jedi Order, leaving Anakin devastated.

Season six consists of four story arcs:
clone trooper Fives investigating the premature activation of Order 66 in a fellow trooper's mind, and discovering the truth about the inhibitor chips implanted in each clone's brain, only to be silenced by Palpaine before he can expose it; Padmé trying to help her old flame
Rush Clovis expose the corruption in the Intergalactic Banking Clan, which causes tensions in her and Anakin's relationship when he learns about her secret mission and intervines; Jar Jar Binks and Mace Windu rescuing the captured Queen of Bardotta from a cult headed by the Nightsisters' former leader, Mother Talzin; and Yoda embarking on a journey to learn more about the nature of the Force after he is visited by the spirit of the late Qui-Gon Jinn.

Season seven consists of three story arcs.
The first one is focused on Captain Rex's character, as he, Anakin, and a team of clones with genetic mutations rescue ARC Trooper Echo, previously believed to have been killed in action, and defeat the Separatists on Anaxes with his help.
The second one focuses on Ahsoka, who befriends sisters Trace and Rafa Martez and helps them settle a debt with the Pyke Syndicate, while trying to conceal her Force powers because of the sisters' hatred of Jedi.
The final arc, which is set concurrently with Revenge of the Sith, depicts the Siege of Mandalore, a battle that had been referenced in previous Star Wars media.
Ahsoka reluctantly returns to the Republic to lead an assault alongside Rex and Mandalorian warrior Bo-Katan Kryze against Darth Maul's forces on Mandalore in hopes of capturing him.
Unbeknowst to them, Maul has foreseen the fall of the Republic and the Jedi Order, and Darth Sidious turning Anakin to the dark side, and hopes to prevent these events by killing the latter.
After Maul is captured, Sidious executes Order 66, causing Ahsoka to be attacked by her own clone troopers, whom she is hesitant to kill.
She manages to restore Rex's free will, and releases Maul to cause a distraction, but he ends up disabling the ship they are on.
All three ultimately escape, with Ahsoka and Rex later burying the clones who died in the ship's crash, and going their separate ways.
The final scene of the series shows Darth Vader finding Ahsoka's lightsaber among the ship's wreckage some time later, and leaving with it in silence.

==
Episodes ==
The series started with a theatrically released animated film; this decision was made after the production team watched completed footage of several early episodes for the planned television series, which were ultimately combined into a single feature-length film.
Time Warner distributed the film, while subsequent episodes aired separately on Cartoon Network.
For the film, Christopher Lee, Anthony Daniels, Samuel L. Jackson, and Matthew Wood reprised their roles as Count Dooku, C-3PO, Mace Windu, and the B1 Battle Droids, respectively, from the live-action movies, but Lee and Jackson would not return for the television series.

On December 5, 2011, a full-length feature cut of one of the Season 3 trilogies of episodes (the one composed by "Nightsisters," "Monster," and "Witches of the Mist") was released for download on iTunes as an uninterrupted movie that was previously shown at selected screenings in 2010.
The three episodes were written by Katie Lucas, who had previously written the Season 1 episode "Jedi Crash" as well as the Season 3 episodes "Sphere of Influence" and "Assassin."
A repeat of season one aired in "decoded" episode format.
Each installment contained unobtrusive text windows giving supplemental information about the characters and events playing out on screen.
The series was cancelled in March 2013, after the conclusion of its fifth season, as a result of The Walt Disney Company's acquisition of Lucasfilm and the decision to remove most Star Wars Expanded Universe works from canon.
Despite this, The Clone Wars was one of the few pieces of Star Wars media to remain part of the new continuity established by Disney, and a sixth season was released on March 7, 2014 on Netflix, along with additional media, such as comic books and novels, based on unfished story arcs that would have been included in the season.
On July 19, 2018, Lucasfilm announced at San Diego Comic-Con that The Clone Wars would return with 12 new episodes in a seventh season to be released on Disney+.
A trailer for the season was released on April 14, 2019 at Star Wars Celebration Chicago.
On August 23, 2019, series creator Dave Filoni announced at the D23 Expo that it will be the final season.
On March 17, 2014, in recognition of the release of the complete series on Netflix, StarWars.com released the official chronological episode order for the first six seasons; this was later updated to include links to the episodes on Disney+.

== Cast and characters ==


===
Main ===
Matt Lanter as Anakin Skywalker, Additional voices
James Arnold Taylor as Obi-Wan Kenobi, Plo Koon, Additional voices
Ashley Eckstein as Ahsoka Tano,
Additional voices
Dee Bradley Baker as Clone Troopers, Saesee Tiin, Onaconda Farr, Bossk, Arok the Hutt, Admiral Trench,
Additional voices
Tom Kane as Narrator, Yoda, Admiral Wullf Yularen,
Additional voices
Matthew Wood as General Grievous, Battle Droids, Poggle the Lesser, Wat Tambor,
Additional voices


===
Recurring ===
Ian Abercrombie (Seasons 1–6) /
Tim Curry (Seasons 5–6) /
Ian McDiarmid (Season 7) as Chancellor Palpatine / Darth Sidious
B.J. Hughes (Season 1) /
Ahmed Best
(Seasons 1–6) as Jar Jar Binks
Clancy Brown as Savage Opress
Corey Burton as Count Dooku / Darth Tyranus, Cad Bane, Ziro the Hutt, Chairman Papanoida, Additional voices
Terrence C. Carson as Mace Windu
Jim Cummings as Hondo Ohnaka
Olivia d'Abo as Luminara Unduli
Anthony Daniels as C-3PO
Ben Diskin as AZI-3, Krismo Sodi, Morley, Otua Blank, WAC-47
Robin Atkin Downes as Castas, Cham Syndulla, Cin Drallig, Ima-Gun Di, Rush Clovis
Jon Favreau as Pre Vizsla
Nika Futterman as Asajj Ventress, Chi Eekway Papanoida, Gardulla
the Hutt, Sy Snootles, TC-70
Brian George as King Katuunko, Chi Cho, Ki-Adi-Mundi
Barbara Goodson as Mother Talzin
Anna Graves as Duchess Satine, Sugi, Tiplar, Tiplee,
Additional voices
Jennifer Hale as Aayla Secura,
Riyo Chuchi
Julian Holloway as Almec, Admiral Killian
Tom Kenny as Greedo, Lt.
Tan Divo, Nute Gunray, Silood
Jaime King as Aurra Sing, Cassie Cryar, Additional Voices
Phil LaMarr as Bail Organa, Kit Fisto,
Orn Free Taa
Daniel Logan as Boba Fett, Clone Cadets
James C. Mathis III as Gregar Typho
Angelique Perrin as Adi Gallia, Mama the Hutt
Kevin Michael Richardson as Jabba
the Hutt, Hay-Zu, Xomit Grunseit
Katee Sackhoff as Bo-Katan Kryze
Meredith Salenger as Barriss Offee,
Che Amanwe Papanoida, Ione Marcy, Pluma Sodi
Kath Soucie as Mon Mothma, Jek Lawquane, Mina Bonteri
Jason Spisak as Lux Bonteri, Zinn Paulness
Stephen Stanton as Mas Amedda, Tarkin, Colonel Meebur Gascon, Moralo Eval, Marg Krim, Additional voices
Catherine Taber as Padmé Amidala, Additional voices
Tasia Valenza as Shaak Ti
Sam Witwer as Darth Maul,
The Son


===
Notable guests ===
Pernilla August as Shmi Skywalker
Clare Grant as Latts Razzi
Seth Green as Todo 360, Ion Papanoida
Mark Hamill as Darth Bane
James Marsters as Faro Argyus
Bobby Moynihan as Pintu Son-El
Liam Neeson as Qui-Gon Jinn
Simon Pegg as Dengar
Greg Proops as Tal Merrik
Elizabeth Rodriguez as Rafa Martez
Ray Stevenson as Gar Saxon
George Takei as Lok Durd
David Tennant as Huyang
Adrienne Wilkinson as The Daughter
Michael York as
Dr. Nuvo Vindi


==
Production ==
At April 2005's Star Wars Celebration III, George Lucas stated that "we are working on a 3-D continuation of the pilot series that was on the Cartoon Network; we probably won't start that project for another year.
"
Lucas hired Dave Filoni after having seen episodes of Avatar: The Last Airbender he had worked on.
By July 2005, pre-production had begun on the series, according to Steve Sansweet, head of Lucasfilm fan relations.
Sansweet referred to the series as "the next generation of the Star Wars saga, a cutting edge 30-minute, 3-D computer-animation series based on the Clone Wars that take place between Episode II ... and Episode III."
Sansweet described the look of the new series as "a melding of Asian anime with unique 3-D animation styling.
"
Primary production took place at the Lucasfilm Animation facility in Singapore.
According to another statement by Sansweet, "Lucasfilm Animation will be hiring a total of about 300 digital artists and others in both California and Singapore locations to produce not only the series but animated feature films in the years ahead."
He said about the series, "to get the series underway, Lucasfilm Animation has hired key production and creative talent to lead the development of its first animation project.
"
Sansweet has said that "a large component of the future of Star Wars and Lucasfilm is CGI animation."

Lucasfilm Animation used Autodesk software to animate both the film and the series.
The Maya 3D-modeling program was used to create the highly detailed worlds, characters and creatures.
Character designer Kilian Plunkett referred to the character designs from Genndy Tartakovsky's original 2003 Clone Wars series, and animators reviewed designs from the 2D series when creating the animation style.
Tartakovsky was not involved with the production, and criticized Lucas's decision to revisit the era.
In 2007, Rob Coleman divulged that one episode was complete, with 15 more in production, and that he was going to direct five of the first 22 episodes.
He revealed that the reaction from licensees was very positive, and that the final assembly of shows was done at Skywalker Ranch.

Speaking at PaleyFest on March 3, 2007, Lucas revealed that the series would be episodic, and as such would not focus on Anakin Skywalker's story; with episodes dedicated to clone troopers and other characters.
Lucas revealed further information in a fan interview, including a new character named Ahsoka Tano, over 100 episodes and a possible appearance by Boba Fett.
The first trailer for the series was released on the official Star Wars website on May 8, 2007.
In an interview in the September 24, 2007 issue of TV Guide, Lucas confirmed that 39 episodes of the series had been completed.
On April 8, 2007, Ain't It Cool News reported that musician Eric Rigler had recorded music for the series.
Rigler disclosed that each planet in the Star Wars galaxy would have its own theme music.
The episode Mr. Rigler performed on was based on Bulgarian music and played on Uilleann pipes.
Kevin Kiner composed the original score for each episode.

Stuart Snyder, who oversaw Cartoon Network and other Turner Broadcasting System cable networks from 2007 to 2014, said he became interested in the new Clone Wars series immediately upon starting the job in May 2007.
Snyder flew out to San Francisco, California to screen several episodes, and told Lucas the only place he wanted to see the show was on Cartoon Network.
Snyder wished to create an action/adventure block of shows on Friday night in an attempt to rejuvenate Cartoon Network.
Snyder expressed confidence that the shows would help boost ratings: "You catch me at a time where I have a smile on my face because of our internal results.
I can say there's a little bit of bragging on the third quarter for us.
"The
"Young Padawans" arc from Season 5 was intended to be aired separately from The Clone Wars as a feature-length pilot for a spin-off series that never materialized.
Seasons 6, 7, and 8, were in some form of production at the time of the show's cancellation in March 2013, shortly after Lucasfilm was purchased by Disney.

==
Release ==
An online comic released alongside the series depicts story snippets between episodes.

=== Broadcast ===
The Clone Wars premiered on October 3, 2008 at 9 p.m. on Cartoon Network.
The Clone Wars on Cartoon Network is shown in a 16:9 (1.77:1) aspect ratio, cropped from its original aspect ratio (OAR) of 2.35:1 (as seen in the UK Sky Premiere screenings).
The show began airing on their Adult Swim block on March 14, 2009, making the series the first Cartoon Network series to simultaneously air on both Cartoon Network and Adult Swim.
The series also aired from January 15 to March 26, 2009 on TNT, making it the first form of animation to air on that channel in over a decade.
The show entered an off-network syndication in 2012, and in the fall of that year Trifecta Entertainment & Media put it into barter syndication.
on Weekends It aired on many affiliates on the Independent Stations as well as an affiliates of Fox MyNetworkTV and The CW
(the latter network's CW Plus service also carries the program as part of its national schedule).
The show has been taken off the air in off-network syndication since fall 2013 due to low costs and was not renewed for Season 2 in the 2013-2014 TV Season due to Disney's completed acquisitions of Lucasfilm Ltd In December 2012.

On March 11, 2013, it was announced that The Clone Wars would be "winding down" to focus on the Star Wars sequel trilogy and a new series, Star Wars Rebels.
On February 13, 2014, Netflix announced that starting on March 7, 2014 they would begin the US distribution of the entire TV series, including some previously unreleased director's cuts, and the previously unaired new season dubbed "The Lost Missions".
The latter also became available for purchase on digital video stores, such as iTunes, in mid-2014.
The Netflix distribution of the series, along with the Blu-rays, included versions of some episodes with previously censored material deemed too inappropriate for the demographic of Cartoon Network.
One of the most well-known edits was the removal of the character Ventress kissing a clone after she had stabbed him with her lightsaber.
The show was removed from Netflix on April 7, 2019.
For the revival and final season, the remaining episodes of the series are exclusively available on Disney+.
The first episode for Season 7 was released on February 21, 2020, with the final episode being released on May 4 of the same year.

===
Home media ===
Warner Home Video distributed the videodisc releases of the first five seasons, while Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment handled the videodisc release of the sixth season as Star Wars:
The Clone Wars – The Lost Missions.

Apart from the season-by-season videodisc sets, there were also three special DVD releases consisting of four episodes from a particular season that reflected a certain story arc or theme:

A Galaxy Divided, an early DVD release of the series which included the four season 1 episodes ("Ambush", "Shadow of Malevolence", "Destroy Malevolence", "Downfall of a Droid")
Clone Commandos, another DVD compilation that includes episode five "Rookies" as well as episodes 19 through 21 ("Storm over Ryloth", "Innocents of Ryloth" and "Liberty on Ryloth").

Darth Maul Returns, a feature-length "director's cut" edited together from Season 4 episodes "Massacre", "Bounty", "Brothers" and "Revenge" and was initially available exclusively at Target.
==
Reception ==


===
Critical response ===
The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported that 67% of critics have given the first season a positive review based on 15 reviews, with an average rating of 5.73/10.
The site's critics consensus reads, "With an agreeably entertaining first season, Star Wars: The Clone Wars opens a fun, kid-friendly chapter of the franchise's sprawling mythology.
"
100% of critics have given the third and fifth seasons a positive review based on 5 reviews each, with an average rating of 8/10 and 7.85/10 respectively.
100% of critics have given the sixth season a positive review based on 12 reviews, with an average rating of 8.92/10.
The site's critics consensus reads, "Sophisticated storytelling and quality animation make the sixth season of Star Wars
: The Clone Wars a fitting end to the series.
"
100% of critics have given the seventh season a positive review based on 24 reviews, with an average rating of 8.43/10.
The site's critics consensus reads, "
Thanks to its beautifully animated action-sequences and its impressively layered storytelling, The Clone Wars' final chapter affirms its place as one of Star Wars' greatest entries.
"
On Metacritic, the first season has a weighted average score of 64 out of 100 based on 9 critic reviews, indicating "generally favorable reviews".
On July 11, 2008, television critics were shown a completed episode of the series.
The Hollywood Reporter's Live Feed blog called the footage "likely the most photo-realistic animated TV series ever produced."
On August 31, 2008, a sneak peek of the new series was shown on Cartoon Network.
IGN named it the 89th best animated series.
They specifically praised the episodes "Rookies", "Cloak of Darkness", and "Lair of Grievous" saying that their storylines stood out as some of the best in the Star Wars expanded universe.

===
Ratings ===
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars became the most-watched series premiere in Cartoon Network history.
The series averaged 3 million total viewers in its debut, according to Nielsen Media Research.
Cartoon Network said the Star Wars spin-off ranked as the number one channel among all major animated networks in the time slot among total viewers (the largest in the demographic for any premiere telecast of an original Cartoon series).
On July 23, 2010, at the San Diego Comic-Con, Craig Glenday, editor of the Guinness World Records, presented Star Wars: The Clone Wars supervising director Dave Filoni, CG supervisor Joel Aron, and lead designer Kilian Plunkett a certificate proclaiming the cartoon series "the highest rated sci-fi animation currently on television".
Tech Times said that, "while the Star Wars prequel films fail to make audiences care about characters like Anakin Skywalker, The Clone Wars succeeds.
"
During May 2020, following the release of the seventh season on Disney+, The Clone Wars became the most streamed digital original show in the United States.

=== Accolades ===


==
The Clone Wars Legacy ==
At the time of cancellation in March 2013, 65 more episodes were in development.
Thirteen of these episodes were finished to become part of Season 6: The Lost Missions, but there were still additional arcs that were never released.
In September 2014, StarWars.com released details of three story arcs from the unfinished episodes.

===
Literature ===


====
Darth Maul: Son of Dathomir ====
A four-episode arc continued the story of Darth Maul following the events from the season 5 episode "The Lawless", detailing his escape from Sidious; Maul regains control of the criminal Shadow Collective, and battles Dooku, Grievous, and Sidious.
The arc was adapted into a four-part limited comic book series, Darth Maul: Son of Dathomir, which debuted in May 2014.

====
Dark Disciple ====
An eight-episode arc with Nightsister Asajj Ventress and Jedi Quinlan Vos was adapted into Dark Disciple, a novel by Christie Golden released on July 7, 2015.
The story follows Vos partnering up with Ventress, hoping to execute Count Dooku.

===
Story reels ===
Two arcs consisting each of four episodes were released on the official Star Wars website for free in the form of complete animatics, albeit with unfinished animation as those episodes only went through the earliest stages of production.
Both were fully voiced by the cast.

====
Crystal Crisis on Utapau ===
=
In September 2014, four unfinished episodes were released on the official Star Wars website.
The arc took place on Utapau with Obi-Wan and Anakin investigating an arms deal involving the Separatists and a Kyber crystal.
The arc also dealt with Anakin's feelings after the departure of Ahsoka.
It was also included in the season 6 Blu-ray.

====
The Bad Batch ====
The unfinished animatics for The Bad Batch, a four-episode arc, were screened at the Star Wars Celebration convention in Anaheim, California on April 17, 2015.
Scripted by Brent Friedman, it is a four-part story arc focusing on a ragtag unit of clone commandos of the same name.
The arc was subsequently released on StarWars.com for free shortly after on April 29, 2015.
The completed episodes were aired as the first part of the seventh season.
On July 13, 2020, a spin-off sequel series titled Star Wars: The Bad Batch was announced; it will follow the titular group of clones working as mercenaries in the immediate aftermath of the Clone War.

==
Video games ==
Seven video games have been released, which are based on the style and character designs of the series.

Star Wars:
The Clone Wars – Lightsaber Duels, a fighting game released on November 11, 2008 for Wii.

Star Wars:
The Clone Wars – Jedi Alliance, an action-adventure game released on November 11, 2008 for Nintendo DS.

Star Wars:
The Clone Wars – Republic Heroes, another action-adventure game taking place between Season 1 and Season 2, released on October 9, 2009 for Microsoft Windows, Xbox 360, PlayStation 3, Wii, PlayStation Portable, PlayStation 2 and Nintendo DS.

Clone Wars Adventures, an online PC game launched on September 15, 2010 online by Sony Online Entertainment and shut down on March 31, 2014.

Lego Star Wars III:
The Clone Wars, released in March 2011 by TT Games for PlayStation 3, PlayStation Portable, Xbox 360, Wii, Nintendo DS, PC, Mac, and Nintendo 3DS, which further stylizes the characters as part of the Lego Star Wars theme and is mostly based on the first two seasons.

Star Wars:
The Clone Wars Pinball, a virtual pinball adaptation of the series' original run, released in 2013 as a purchaseable add-on for Zen Studios' Star Wars Pinball collection for most seventh- and eighth-generation home video game systems, computers and mobile devices.

Disney Infinity 3.0, released in September 2015 by Disney Interactive for PlayStation 4, PlayStation 3, Xbox One, Xbox 360, Wii U, Microsoft Windows, iOS and Android, which stylizes select major characters from the show as action figures that become playable only via a toys-to-life NFC system.
Each copy of the game comes with the playset, "Twilight of the Republic", which is an alternate storyline set during the Clone Wars era, along with two starting characters, Anakin and Ahsoka.
Other characters from the show also appear, although most of them are not playable or are fought as bosses.
Characters and/or locations from the show have also appeared in the following Star Wars games listed below:
Star Wars: Galactic Defense, a now-defunct tower defense game released on iOS and Android by DeNA, in which a number of playable champions include characters from the show.
Several levels in the main campaign also take place on the planet Felucia, a major Clone Wars hotspot featured in some episodes.

Star Wars: Galaxy of Heroes, a turn-based RPG also released on iOS and Android by Electronic Arts, where some levels take place on planets depicted in the show (such as Dathomir) and a number of collectible, playable characters are from the show.

Star Wars:
Force Arena, an online MOBA game released on iOS and Android by Netmarble, where an August 2017 update allowed players to recruit characters, vehicles and battle units from the series, as well as battle on planets like Felucia.

Star Wars Battlefront II, a video game available on Microsoft Windows, PlayStation 4 and Xbox One, in which players can battle on or directly above planets like Ryloth and Kamino, where some battles in the series were fought.
Wood, Taylor, Lanter and Burton also reprise their voice roles for four new playable heroes (General Grievous, Obi-Wan Kenobi, Anakin Skywalker and Count Dooku, respectively) being added to the game's third season in late 2018, themed after the Clone Wars.

== Notes ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars at StarWars.com
The Clone Wars Legacy at StarWars.com
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars at Lucasfilm.com
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars at The Big Cartoon DataBase
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars at IMDb
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars at TV.com
The Empire Strikes Back, also known as Star Wars:
Episode V –
The Empire Strikes Back, is a 1980 American epic space opera film directed by Irvin Kershner and written by Leigh Brackett and Lawrence Kasdan, based on a story by George Lucas.
The second installment in the original Star Wars trilogy, as the sequel to Star Wars (1977), it is the second film in the franchise to be produced, and the fifth episode of the "Skywalker saga".
The story is set three years after the events of the first film, as the Galactic Empire hunts the scattered Rebel Alliance throughout the galaxy.
While Darth Vader relentlessly pursues Luke Skywalker's friends—Han Solo, Princess Leia, and Chewbacca—Luke studies the Force under Jedi Master Yoda to prepare himself for his upcoming confrontation with Vader.

The film is produced by Lucasfilm.
The ensemble cast includes Mark Hamill, Harrison Ford, Carrie Fisher, Billy Dee Williams, Anthony Daniels, David Prowse, Kenny Baker, Peter Mayhew, and Frank Oz.
Following the success of Star Wars, Lucas hired Brackett to write the sequel; following her death in 1978, he outlined the Star Wars saga as a whole and wrote the next draft himself, before hiring Kasdan.
Lucas chose not to direct due to his obligations at Industrial Light & Magic and handling the financing, and passed the duty to Kershner, his former professor.
Filmed from March to September 1979, The Empire Strikes Back faced a difficult production that included actor injuries, the death of writer Leigh Brackett, a set fire, and fines from the Writers and Directors Guilds of America.
The initial budget was $18 million, but ballooned to $33 million by the time production concluded, making it one of the most expensive films ever made at the time.

The Empire Strikes Back premiered at the Kennedy Center in Washington, D.C. on May 17, 1980, and was released in the United States on May 21, 1980.
The film became the highest-grossing film of 1980 with $440 million.
Initially being met with mixed critical reviews, it is now hailed by many as the best film in the Star Wars saga and one of the greatest films ever made.
The film has grossed over $550 million worldwide from its original run and several re-releases.
Adjusted for inflation, it is the second-highest-grossing sequel of all time and the thirteenth highest-grossing film of all time in North America.
In 2010, the film was selected for preservation in the United States' National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant".
The Empire Strikes Back had a significant impact on filmmaking and popular culture, being regarded as a rare example of a sequel that transcends the original.
The climax, in which Vader reveals to Luke that he is his father, is often cited as one of the greatest plot twists in film history.
The final installment of the original Star Wars trilogy, Return of the Jedi, followed in 1983.

==
Plot ==
Three years after the destruction of the Death Star, the Rebel Alliance, led by Princess Leia, have a base on the ice planet Hoth.
The Imperial fleet, led by a merciless Darth Vader, hunts for the new Rebel base by dispatching probe droids across the galaxy.
Luke Skywalker is captured by a wampa while investigating one such probe and dragged into the creature's cave, but manages to escape after using the Force to retrieve his lightsaber.
Before Luke succumbs to hypothermia, the Force spirit of his deceased mentor, Obi-Wan Kenobi, instructs him to go to the swamp planet Dagobah to train under Jedi Master Yoda.
Han Solo discovers Luke and manages to keep him alive by placing him inside the body of his dead Tauntaun mount, until the two are rescued by a search party the following morning.

The probe alerts the Imperial fleet to the Rebels' location.
The Empire launches a large-scale attack using AT-AT walkers, forcing the Rebels to evacuate their base.
Han and Leia escape with C-3PO and Chewbacca on the Millennium Falcon, but the ship's hyperdrive malfunctions.
While they hide in an asteroid field, where Han and Leia become romantic amidst the tensions, Vader hires several bounty hunters to find the Falcon.
Meanwhile, Luke travels with R2-D2 in his X-wing fighter to Dagobah, where he crash-lands.
He meets a diminutive creature who later reveals himself to be Yoda; the Jedi master reluctantly accepts Luke as his apprentice after conferring with Obi-Wan's spirit.
Luke learns more about the Force from Yoda, who uses it to lift the sunken X-wing out of the swamp.

After evading the Imperial fleet, Han's group travels to the floating Cloud City on the planet Bespin, which is governed by Han's old friend Lando Calrissian.
Bounty hunter Boba Fett tracks the Falcon and, with Vader, forces Lando to hand the group over to the Empire.
Vader plans to use the group as bait to lure Luke, intending to capture and deliver him to the Emperor so that he could be turned to dark side of the Force.
Luke experiences a premonition of Han and Leia in pain so against the wishes of Yoda and Obi-Wan, he abandons his training to rescue them.

Vader intends to hold Luke in suspended animation by imprisoning him in carbonite, selecting Solo to be frozen as an experiment.
Han survives the process and is given to Fett, who plans to collect a bounty on him from Jabba the Hutt.
Lando then frees Leia and Chewbacca, but they are too late to stop Fett from departing with Han.
Under attack from stormtroopers, they fight their way back to the Falcon and flee the city.

Meanwhile, Luke arrives and engages Vader in a lightsaber duel that leads them over Cloud City's central air shaft.
Vader severs Luke's right hand, disarming him, and tempts him to embrace his anger and join the dark side.
Luke refuses and accuses Vader of killing his father, only for Vader to reveal that he is Luke's father.
Disbelieving the truth, Luke drops into the air shaft and is ejected beneath the floating city, where he grabs hold of an antenna.
He reaches out telepathically to Leia, who senses him and persuades Lando and Chewbacca to turn back.
After Luke is brought aboard, they are chased by TIE fighters towards Vader on his Star Destroyer, and discover that the Falcon's hyperdrive has been sabotaged, but R2-D2 reactivates it, allowing them to escape.

The group rejoins the Rebel fleet, where Luke's severed hand is replaced with a robotic prosthesis.
Lando and Chewbacca begin their quest to find Han, as the other rebels watch the Falcon depart.

== Cast ==
Mark Hamill as Luke Skywalker: A former moisture farmer, an X-wing fighter pilot in the Rebel Alliance, and Jedi in training.

Harrison Ford as Han Solo: A former smuggler, the captain of the Millennium Falcon.

Carrie Fisher as Leia Organa: The princess of the destroyed planet Alderaan, and one of the Alliance's leaders.

David Prowse as Darth Vader: A powerful Sith Lord and chief enforcer of the Galactic Empire.

James Earl Jones as the voice of Darth Vader.

Billy Dee Williams as Lando Calrissian: The administrator of Cloud City, an old friend of Han's, and the previous owner of the Millennium Falcon.

Anthony Daniels as C-3PO: A humanoid protocol droid serving the Alliance, and R2-D2's longtime companion.

Peter Mayhew as Chewbacca: Han's loyal Wookiee friend and co-pilot.

Kenny Baker as R2-D2:
An astromech droid series in service of the Alliance; Luke's friend and C-3PO's longtime companion.

Alec Guinness as Obi-Wan Kenobi:
Luke's deceased Jedi mentor, who retruns as a Force spirit after being killed by his former pupil, Vader, in the first film.

Frank Oz as Yoda: A diminutive, centuries-old Jedi Master living in self-imposed exile who reluctantly trains Luke.

While Oz provided the voice and puppetry for Yoda, Kathryn Mullen, David Barclay, Wendy Froud, and Deep Roy served as assistant puppeteers.
Denis Lawson reprises his role as Wedge Antilles, one of the Rebel Alliance's top X-wing pilots, from the first film.
John Hollis plays Lobot, Lando's personal aide.
Julian Glover appears as General Veers, the commander of the Empire's forces during the battle of Hoth.
Kenneth Colley portrays Admiral Piett, the Empire's top admiral and commander of Vader's personal flagship, Executor.
Michael Sheard portrays Admiral Ozzel, Vader's previous admiral, who is killed for his incompetence.
Michael Culver appears as Captain Needa, one of the Empire's captains who fails to catch the Millennium Falcon and is executed by Vader as a result.
John Ratzenberger portrays Major Derlin, one of the officers who leads the Rebels in the Battle of Hoth.
Bruce Boa appears as General Rieekan, Princess Leia's military advisor on Hoth.
Christopher Malcolm plays Rebel snowspeeder pilot Zev Senesca, who finds Skywalker and Solo on the surface of Hoth.
John Morton portrays Dak Ralter, Luke's gunner in the battle of Hoth who is crushed by an AT-AT.
Richard Oldfield plays Rebel pilot Hobbie Klivian.
Morris Bush, Alan Harris, Chris Parsons, and Cathy Munro portray the bounty hunters Dengar, Bossk, 4-LOM, and Zuckuss, respectively.

Jeremy Bulloch portrays Boba Fett, a bounty hunter hired by Vader to track down the Millennium Falcon; the character is voiced by Jason Wingreen, and was originally introduced in the Star Wars Holiday Special (1978).
Multiple actors have portrayed the Emperor, the evil ruler of the Galactic Empire and Vader's Sith master, who appears via hologram.
Clive Revill provides his voice, while actress Marjorie Eaton portrays him physically, wearing a mask.

==
Production ==


===
Development ===
George Lucas's Star Wars, released in May 1977, was an unexpected box office success and quickly became a pop-culture phenomenon.
Lucas, who did not expect the success, stopped doing publicity after a while because it became too overwhelming, and had flown to Hawaii with friend Steven Spielberg to begin conceptualising their next blockbuster franchise, Indiana Jones.
The success of Star Wars and its licensing opportunities meant that a sequel was inevitable.
Sequels were generally not well regarded at the time and Lucas was not ready to commit, as the production of the original film "had been a four-year horrific seat-of-the-pants experience"—one
that Lucas never wanted to experience again.
However, the film did not represent what he had envisioned, and he knew that a sequel would allow him to finish the story.
Additionally, Lucas had already established the Star Wars universe, so he figured a sequel would provide an opportunity to introduce more ideas and adventures.
"
I always felt if I could go back to those environments using the same characters, I could make a helluva better movie," he said.
Lucas hired Alan Dean Foster, the ghostwriter of the Star Wars novelization, to write the sequel novel Splinter of the Mind's Eye
so it could be adapted as a low-budget film if Star Wars was a box-office failure, but by August 1977 Star Wars was still the number-one film in cinemas, motivating Lucas to continue the saga.
Before production on the sequel, then titled Star Wars: Chapter II, could begin, Lucas had to sort out various problems that had arisen.
His special effects company, Industrial Light & Magic (ILM), no longer had any employees, as many of them had left to form Apogee and work on Battlestar Galactica.
Galactica became a "thorn in [Lucas's] side," as the project bore a strong resemblance to Star Wars to the point that production illustrator Ralph McQuarrie called it a "rip-off."
Lucas hired some of the Galactica crew back, but had to replace others—most notably John Dykstra, with whom he'd had a hard time working on Star Wars.
Lucas had almost fired Dykstra during the production of the first film but did not because Dykstra had close friends on the crew, so Lucas also chose not to hire them back as well.
One of Lucas's new hirees was Brian Johnson, who had worked on 2001: A Space Odyssey (1968) and turned down an opportunity to work on the first film.
Lucas also had to build his studio, Lucasfilm, which similarly had few employees.
Distributor 20th Century Fox had tried to sell Star Wars to other studios because it feared it would lose money on the overbudget production, but following the film's success, by September 1977 it was eager to make a deal with Lucas on the sequel.
Unlike the prolonged negotiations of Star Wars, which took years, Lucas was able to strike a deal with Fox swiftly, partially because he planned to finance the sequel himself with $33 million from loans and the previous film's earning.
Lucas hoped to become independent from the Hollywood film industry and went against the principles of many Hollywood producers, who believe in never investing one's own money.
Similar to how he set up The Star Wars Corporation for the first film, Lucas created a subsidiary, The Chapter II Company, to help minimize the financial risks.
By the end of September, the contract had been signed: the "negative cost" of the sequel was set at $8 million, Lucas would receive final cut privilege, and Lucasfilm was guaranteed 77.5% of the profits if the film grossed over $100 million.
Under the contract, by July 1978 Lucasfilm subsidiary Black Falcon Ltd. would gain control of licensing, marketing, and merchandise, and the profit split would be 80% for Lucasfilm and 20% for Fox.
The contract made it clear that Fox would have no creative control over the film, set a January 1979 start date for filming, and a May 1, 1980 release date.
Now fully in control of the Star Wars enterprise, Lucas chose not to direct the sequel because of his other production roles, including overseeing ILM and handling the financing.
Lucas offered the role of director to Irvin Kershner, one of his former professors at the USC School of Cinematic Arts.
Kershner was known for smaller character-driven films, but had more recently directed the true-life drama Raid on Entebbe (1977) and the thriller Eyes of Laura Mars (1978).
Kershner initially turned Lucas down, citing his belief that a sequel would never meet the quality or originality of Star Wars.
He called his agent, who immediately demanded that he take the job.
In November 1977, Lucas hired science-fiction author Leigh Brackett to write the screenplay.
Lucas had written the original Star Wars only out of necessity, which had been challenging since he had to create the world.
Since the Star Wars universe had been established, he chose to collaborate with Brackett and give her ideas for the script.

===
Writing ===
Lucas began outlining the film around August 1977, introducing ideas such as the Emperor and the notion that Luke Skywalker had a long-lost sister.
Lucas also started considering ways to explain Luke actor Mark Hamill's facial scars (which he suffered in a January 1977 automobile crash) within the context of the Star Wars universe.
According to Hamill, Lucas told him that, had Hamill died in the accident, he would have replaced Luke with a new character.
This led to the creation of the Wampa, a monster that dwelled on the planet Hoth that mauls Luke in the opening scenes of the film.
Story conferences began on November 28, 1977, after Lucas hired Brackett.
The two held story conferences until early December, and Brackett wrote her draft while McQuarrie began to paint concept art.
Lucas and Brackett discussed including the planet of the Wookiees (which had been considered for the first film), a new alien species, and two new characters—the Emperor and a gambler from Han Solo's past.
Lucas also decided early on that they needed to introduce a new teacher for Luke, since Obi-Wan had been killed off in the first film.
Lucas's initial treatment, partly inspired by Joseph Campbell's The Hero with a Thousand Faces, contained a few key scenes that made the final film: Luke would study the Force under a Jedi master (then named Minch Yoda) before dueling Vader and ending up hanging from the bottom of a floating city, and the gambler would betray Han to Vader.
As Harrison Ford had not agreed to appear in a third film, the character of Han Solo was written out of the ending by having him go off to secure funding for the Rebellion.
During his discussions with Brackett, Lucas conceived the title, The Empire Strikes Back, and the idea to have it follow a structure akin to his film American Graffiti (1973)—one main plot with three subplots.
Lucas envisioned 60 scenes, a script around 100 pages, and a roughly two-hour runtime.
The two laid out the film's basic plot, but also discussed expanding the character of Han—with Lucas suggesting that he met Chewbacca because he was raised by Wookiees—and Luke's lost twin sister.
Brackett and Lucas came up with various ideas for subplots, including a love triangle (Lucas compared Han to Rhett Butler, Leia to Scarlett O'Hara, and Luke to Ashley Wilkes in Gone with the Wind), the reintroduction of Obi-Wan as a ghost, an arctic world inspired by Flash Gordon (1939–1940) and The Thing from Another World (1951), further development of the Force, and the new Jedi master being an elderly, froglike alien.
They also conceived new aliens, planets, and the notion that the Emperor, not Darth Vader, is the true villain.
Brackett's treatment, delivered on February 21, 1978, was similar to the final film, but with Anakin Skywalker appearing as a ghost to instruct Luke and Vader as a separate character.
Lucas was disappointed with Brackett's draft, but he was unable to discuss it with her, as she died soon after.
Without Brackett, Lucas had to write the next draft himself.
It was this draft where Lucas first made use of the "Episode" numbering for the films; The Empire Strikes Back became Episode II.
He also used the plot twist that Darth Vader was Luke's father.
According to Lucas, he found this draft enjoyable to write, as opposed to the yearlong struggles writing the first film, and quickly wrote two more drafts, all in April 1978.Lucas outlined a new backstory:
Anakin Skywalker had been Ben Kenobi's brilliant student, and had a child named Luke, but was swayed to the dark side by the Emperor (who was really a Sith Lord).
Anakin battled Kenobi on the site of a volcano and was horribly wounded, but was resurrected as Darth Vader (this idea would later be realised on screen over 25 years later in Star Wars:
Episode III - Revenge of the Sith).
Meanwhile, Kenobi hid Luke on Tatooine while the Republic became the Empire and Vader systematically hunted down the Jedi.
With this new backstory in place, Lucas decided that The Empire Strikes Back would be the second film of two trilogies, designating it Episode V by the fifth draft.
Lawrence Kasdan had just completed writing Raiders of the Lost Ark, and Lucas hired him to write the next drafts with input from director Irvin Kershner.
Kasdan, Kershner, and producer Gary Kurtz saw the film as a more serious and adult film, helped by the new, darker storyline, and developed the series from the light adventure roots of the first film.

===
Filming ===
Filming began in Norway, at the Hardangerjøkulen glacier near the town of Finse, on March 5, 1979.
Like the filming of Star Wars, where the production in Tunisia coincided with the area's first major rainstorm in fifty years, the weather was against the film crew.
While filming in Norway, they encountered the worst winter storm in fifty years.
Temperatures dropped to −20 °F (
−29 °C), and 5.5 metres (18 ft) of snow fell.
On one occasion, the crew were unable to exit their hotel.
They achieved a shot involving Luke's exit of the Wampa cave by opening the hotel's doors and filming Mark Hamill running out into the snow while the crew remained warm inside.
Mark Hamill's face was scarred in a motor accident that occurred between filming of Star Wars and
The Empire Strikes Back.
Despite reports to the contrary, the scene in which Luke is knocked unconscious by the Wampa was not added specifically to explain this change to Hamill's face.
Lucas admitted that the scene "helped" the situation, though he felt that Luke's time fighting in the rebellion was sufficient explanation.
The production moved to Elstree Studios near London on March 13, where over 60 sets were built, more than double the number used in the previous film.
A fire in January on Stage 3 (during filming of Stanley Kubrick's The Shining) forced the budget to be increased from $18.5 million to $22 million, and by July the budget increased $3 million more.

Filming finished on September 24, 1979.The script contained a scene in which Princess Leia professed her love to Han Solo, with Han replying "I love you too."
Harrison Ford felt the characterization was not being used effectively, and Kershner agreed.
After several takes, the director told the actor to improvise on the spot, and Ford changed Solo's line to "
I know.
"During
production, great secrecy surrounded the fact that Darth Vader was Luke's father.
Like the rest of the crew, Prowse—who spoke all of Vader's lines during filming—was given a false page that contained dialogue with the revelatory line being, "No.
Obi-Wan killed your father.
"
Hamill was informed just moments before cameras rolled on his close-up by director Irvin Kershner, and was told that he would be one of only three people to know the twist (the other two being Kershner and Lucas); therefore, if the news were to leak, they would know the source was Hamill.
Hamill did not tell anyone, including his wife; according to Hamill, Ford did not learn the truth until he watched the film.
To preserve the dramatic opening sequences of his films, Lucas wanted the screen credits to come only at the end.
While this practice has become more common over the years, this was relatively unusual at the time.
The Writers and Directors Guilds of America had no problem allowing it on Star Wars, back in 1977, because the writer-director credit (George Lucas) matched the company name.
However, when Lucas did the same thing for the sequel, it became an issue because they viewed the company credit (Lucasfilm) as displaying Lucas' name at the start of the film, while the director and writers had theirs on the end.
The guilds fined him over $250,000 and attempted to pull Empire out of theatres.
The DGA also attacked Kershner and fined him $25,000; to protect his director, Lucas paid all the fines to the guilds.
Due to the controversy, he left the Directors and Writers guilds, and the Motion Picture Association.
The initial production budget of $18 million was 50 percent more than that of the original.
After the various increases in budget, The Empire Strikes Back became one of the most expensive films of its day, costing $33 million, and after the bank threatened to call in his loan, Lucas was forced to approach 20th Century Fox.
Lucas made a deal with the studio to secure the loan in exchange for paying the studio more money, but without the loss of his sequel and merchandising rights.
After the film's box office success, unhappiness within the studio over the deal's generosity to Lucas caused studio president Alan Ladd, Jr. (who had supported the deal) to quit.
The departure of his longtime ally caused Lucas to take Raiders of the Lost Ark to Paramount Pictures.

=== Effects ===
After the release of Star Wars, ILM grew from a struggling company and moved to Marin County, California.
The Empire Strikes Back provided the company with new challenges.
Whereas Star Wars mostly featured space sequences, The Empire Strikes Back featured not only space dogfights but also an ice planet battle opening sequence and elements of cities that floated among the clouds.
For the battle scenes on the ice planet Hoth, the initial intent was to use bluescreen to composite the Imperial walkers into still-shots from the original set.
Instead, an artist (Michael Pangrazio) was hired to paint landscapes, resulting in the Imperial walkers being shot using stop motion animation in front of the landscape paintings.
The original designs for the AT-ATs were, according to Phil Tippett, "big armored vehicles with wheels".
Many believe the finished design was inspired by the Port of Oakland container cranes, but Lucas denied this.
In designing the Jedi Master Yoda, Stuart Freeborn used his own face as a model and added the wrinkles of Albert Einstein for the appearance of exceptional intelligence.
Sets for Dagobah were built five feet (1.52m) above the stage floor, allowing puppeteers to crawl underneath and hold up the Yoda puppet.
The setup presented communication problems for Frank Oz, who portrayed Yoda, as he was underneath the stage and unable to hear the crew and Mark Hamill above.
Hamill later expressed his dismay at being the only human character on set for months; he felt like a trivial element on a set of animals, machines, and moving props.
Kershner commended Hamill for his performance with the puppet.

===
Music ===
The musical score of The Empire Strikes Back was composed and conducted by John Williams, and it was performed by the London Symphony Orchestra at a cost of about $250,000.
In 1980, the company RSO Records published this film's original musical score as both a double LP album and as an 8-track cartridge in the United States.
Its front cover artwork features the mask of Darth Vader against a backdrop of outer space, as seen on the advance theatrical poster for the film.

In 1985, the first compact disc (CD) issue of the film score was made by the company Polydor Records, which had absorbed both RSO Records and its music catalog.
Polydor Records used a shorter, one compact-disc edition of the music as their master.
In 1993, 20th Century Fox Film Scores released a special boxed set of four compact discs: the Star Wars Trilogy: The Original Soundtrack Anthology.
This anthology included the film scores of all three members of the original Star Wars Trilogy in separate CDs, even though there was significant overlap between the three (such as the Star Wars theme music).In 1997, the record company RCA Victor released a definitive two-CD set to accompany the publications of all three of the Special Editions of the films of the Star Wars Trilogy.
This original limited-edition set of CDs featured a 32-page black booklet that was enclosed within a protective outer slip-case.
The covers of the booklet and of the slip-case have selections from the poster art of the Star Wars Trilogy: Special Edition.
All of the tracks have been digitally re-mastered supposedly for superior clarity of sound.

RCA Victor
next re-packaged the Special Edition set later on in 1997, offering it in slim-line jewel case packaging as an unlimited edition, but without the packaging that the original "black booklet" version offered.
In 2004, the Sony Classical Records company purchased the sales rights of the original trilogy's musical scores—primarily because it already had the sales rights of the music from the trilogy of prequels: The Phantom Menace, Attack of the Clones, and Revenge of the Sith.
Hence in 2004, the Sony Classical company began manufacturing copies of the film-score CDs that RCA Victor had been making since 1997, including the one for The Empire Strikes Back.
This set was made with new cover artwork similar to that of the film's first publication on DVD.
Despite the digital re-mastering by Sony Classical, their CD version made and sold since 2004 is essentially the same as the version by RCA Victor.

==
Release ==
The world premiere of The Empire Strikes Back was held on May 17, 1980, at the Kennedy Center in Washington, D.C. (as a special Children's World Premiere event).
The film had a Royal Charity Premiere in London at the Odeon Cinema in Leicester Square on May 20.
The special event was dubbed "Empire Day", a playful take on the British Commonwealth Day holiday (known as Empire Day prior to 1958), where legions of stormtroopers were unleashed across the city.
A series of other charity benefit premieres were held in numerous locations on May 19 and 20.
The film went on to official general release in North America and the U.K. on May 21, 1980.
The first wave of release included 126 70 mm prints, before a wider release in June 1980 (which were mostly 35 mm prints).
Lucas added three shots to the film's ending before the latter release.
During the initial theatrical run in Europe and Australia, the short film Black Angel by Star Wars art director Roger Christian was shown before the feature.

Prior to its opening crawl, the film began in a similar way to the original Star Wars film with a presentation of both the "A long time ago in a galaxy far, far away...."
text and with the Star Wars logo receding into a starscape background.

The crawl then appeared with the plain text headings "Episode V" and
"The Empire Strikes Back".

Trailer and poster promotions for the film generally read "Star Wars:
The Empire Strikes Back" without the episode number.
Like A New Hope, The Empire Strikes Back was rated PG by the Motion Picture Association of America, and certificate U in the United Kingdom.

===
Box office ===
The Empire Strikes Back opened mid-week across 126 theaters prior to the three-day Memorial Day holiday weekend.
Compared to Star Wars $1.5 million Memorial Day opening weekend, The Empire Strikes Back earned $4.9 million during the weekend—an average of $38,972 per theater.
This figure increased a further $1.5 million during the holiday Monday to a total of $6.4 million—an average of $50,919 per theater—making it the number one film of the weekend, ahead of counterprogrammed debuting films, the comedy The Gong Show Movie ($1.5 million) and psychological horror
The Shining ($600K).After four weeks on release, it expanded to 824 screens and grossed $10.8 million for the weekend setting a new weekly record of $20.4 million.
Within three months of the release of The Empire Strikes Back, Lucas had recovered his $33 million investment and distributed $5 million in bonuses to employees.
It earned $181.4 million during its first run in the United States and Canada.

It was re-released on July 31, 1981 and grossed a further $26.8 million and again on November 19, 1982 with a gross of $14.5 million to bring its gross to $222.7 million.
When The Empire Strikes Back returned to cinemas in 1997, it grossed $22 million in its first weekend of re-release.
As of 2007, the film has grossed $290.5 million domestically and $547.9 million worldwide.
35 years after the film's initial release, it re-entered the UK box office at number 9 grossing $470,000 from June 4–7, 2015.In commemoration for its 40th anniversary, the film was given a limited re-released into 411 theaters on July 10, 2020.
Due to the COVID-19 pandemic closing most theaters worldwide and limiting what films played, Empire grossed $611,000 and topped the box office.

===
Critical response ===
Initial critical reception of The Empire Strikes Back was divided, with some critics dismissing the film and others celebrating it.
For example, Vincent Canby of The New York Times wrote a largely dismissive review of the film, saying "it is nice and inoffensive and, in a way that no one associated with it need be ashamed of, it's also silly.
Attending to it is a lot like reading the middle of a comic book.
"
David Denby of New York magazine called the film "a Wagnerian pop movie—grandiose, thrilling, imperiously generous in scale, and also a bit ponderous".
Judith Martin of The Washington Post criticized the film's "middle-of-the-story" plot, which she claimed had no particular beginning or end.
However, this was a concept that Lucas had intended.
James Harwood of Variety wrote, "'The Empire Strikes Back' is a worthy sequel to 'Star Wars,' equal in both technical mastery and characterization, suffering only from the familiarity with the effects generated in the original and imitated too much by others."
Gene Siskel of the Chicago Tribune gave the film three-and-a-half stars out of four and stated that although the film "has some poor special effects" and that Lando Calrissian "isn't given enough screen time to develop into anyone special," he found these weaknesses "trivial compared to the strengths of the film, which are considerable and sometimes even majestic.
"Charles
Champlin of the Los Angeles Times stated that the film "seems to me a hugely accomplished and exciting follow-on to 'Star Wars'," adding that "I wish it were a handful of minutes shorter
but this is my single caveat about another richly imaginative, engrossing and spectacular motion picture from the redoubtable George Lucas."
Roger Angell of The New Yorker reported, "I had a great time at 'The Empire Strikes Back,' and although I did not find it as consistently pleasing and exciting as its predecessor, I felt stretched and terrifically entertained—and convinced, as I was at 'Star Wars,' that I was watching a first-class kids' movie."
Richard Combs of The Monthly Film Bulletin was negative, writing, "That story counts for less than gimmicks, and characters less than both, might be judged from the lack of resonance in the one narrative revelation, concerning Darth Vader and Luke Skywalker."
Bruce McCabe of The Boston Globe said, "This is a respectable sequel to 'Star Wars' but not as good," explaining that "[t]he sequel is more calculated.
The spontaneous energy of the original, which grew out of the arcane riskiness of the project, is missing."
In Ares Magazine issue 3, Christopher John wrote that "George Lucas has produced a better film than the original, though many feared he would not even be able to equal it."
===
Accolades ===
At the 53rd Academy Awards, The Empire Strikes Back won the award for Best Sound, which was awarded to Bill Varney, Steve Maslow, Gregg Landaker, and Peter Sutton.
In addition, the film received the Special Achievement Academy Award for Best Visual Effects that was awarded to Brian Johnson, Richard Edlund, Dennis Muren, and Bruce Nicholson.
Composer John Williams was also nominated for Best Original Score, and Norman Reynolds, Leslie Dilley, Harry Lange, Alan Tomkins, and Michael Ford were nominated for Best Art Direction.
In addition, John Williams was awarded the British Academy Film Award for his compositions: the Anthony Asquith Award for Film Music.
The Empire Strikes Back also received British Academy Film Award nominations for Best Sound and Best Production Design.
Williams was also nominated for a Grammy Award and a Golden Globe Award for his musical score of the film.
The Empire Strikes Back received four Saturn Awards, for Mark Hamill as Best Actor, Irvin Kershner for Best Director, Brian Johnson and Richard Edlund for Best Special Effects, and the Saturn Award for Best Science Fiction Film.
The Empire Strikes Back won the Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation.
The film was nominated for the Writers Guild of America Award for Best Adapted Screenplay.
The Empire Strikes Back was awarded the Golden Screen Award in Germany.

==
Post-release ==


===
Thematic analysis ===
Like its predecessor, The Empire Strikes Back draws from several mythological stories and world religions.
It also includes many elements from 1930s film serials such as a childhood favorite of Lucas', Flash Gordon, which similarly featured a city afloat in the sky.

===
Special Edition and other changes ===
As part of Star Wars's 20th anniversary celebration in 1997, The Empire Strikes Back was digitally remastered and re-released along with Star Wars and Return of the Jedi under the title
Star Wars Trilogy:
Special Edition.
Lucas took this opportunity to make several minor changes to the film.
These included explicitly showing the Wampa creature on Hoth in full form, creating a more complex flight path for the Falcon as it approaches Cloud City, digitally replacing some of the interior walls of Cloud City with vistas of Bespin, and replacing certain lines of dialogue.
A short sequence was also added depicting Vader's return to his Super Star Destroyer after dueling with Luke, created from alternate angles of a scene from Return of the Jedi.
Most of the changes were small and esthetic.
Some fans believe that the changes to the film were less detrimental than that of the other two entries in the trilogy.
The film was also resubmitted to the MPAA for rating; it was again rated PG, but under the Association's new description nomenclature, the reason given was for "sci-fi action/violence".
This version of the film runs 127 minutes.

The 2004 release, among other changes replaced Jason Wingreen's voicework as Boba Fett with Temuera Morrison, who portrayed the character's father Jango Fett in Star Wars:
Episode II – Attack of the Clones (2002).
Similarly, the Emperor, as voiced by Clive Revill and portrayed by Marjorie Eaton, was replaced by Ian McDiarmid, who portrayed the character in later films.

===
Home media ===
When the film debuted on television, it was preceded by a second-person introduction by Darth Vader, framed as an interruption of the Earth broadcast by the Galactic Empire.
The film was released on CED in 1984 and on VHS and Laserdisc several times during the 1980s and 1990s.
The Empire Strikes Back was released on DVD in September 2004, bundled in a box set with A New Hope,
Return of the Jedi, and a bonus disc of extra features.
The films were digitally restored and remastered, with additional changes made by George Lucas.
The bonus features include a commentary by George Lucas, Irvin Kershner, Ben Burtt, Dennis Muren, and Carrie Fisher, as well as an extensive documentary called Empire of Dreams: The Story of the Star Wars Trilogy.
Also included are featurettes, teasers, trailers, TV spots, still galleries, video game demos, and a preview of Revenge of the Sith.
For the DVD release, Lucas and his team made changes that they stated would ensure continuity between The Empire Strikes
Back and the then-recently released prequel trilogy films.
The most noticeable of these changes was replacing the stand-in used in the holographic image of the Emperor (with Clive Revill providing the voice) with actor Ian McDiarmid providing some slightly altered dialogue.
With this release, Lucas also supervised the creation of a high-definition digital print of The Empire Strikes Back and the original trilogy's other films.
It was reissued in December 2005 as part of a three-disc "limited edition" boxed set that did not feature the bonus disc.
The film was reissued again on a separate two-disc Limited Edition DVD for a brief time from September 12, 2006, to December 31, 2006, this time with the film's original, unaltered version as bonus material.
It was also re-released in a trilogy box set on November 4, 2008.
There was controversy surrounding the initial release, because the DVDs featured non-anamorphic versions of the original films based on LaserDisc releases from 1993 (as opposed to newly remastered, film-based, high-definition transfers).
Since non-anamorphic transfers fail to make full use of the resolution available on widescreen televisions, many fans were disappointed with this choice.
On August 14, 2010, George Lucas announced that all six Star Wars films in their Special Edition form would be released on Blu-ray Disc in Fall 2011.
On January 6, 2011, 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment announced the Blu-ray release for September 2011 in three different editions.
On April 7, 2015, Walt Disney Studios, 20th Century Fox, and Lucasfilm jointly announced the digital releases of the six released Star Wars films.
The Empire Strikes Back was released through the iTunes Store, Amazon Video, Vudu, Google Play, and Disney Movies
Anywhere on April 10, 2015.Walt
Disney Studios Home Entertainment reissued The Empire Strikes Back on Blu-ray, DVD, and digital download on September 22, 2019.
Additionally, all six films were available for 4K HDR and Dolby Atmos streaming on Disney+ upon the service's launch on November 12, 2019.
This version of the film was released by Disney on 4K Ultra HD Blu-ray box set on March 31, 2020.
===
Radio ===
A radio play adaptation of The Empire Strikes Back was written by Brian Daley, and was produced for and broadcast on the National Public Radio network in the U.S. during 1983.
It was based on characters and situations created by George Lucas, and on the screenplay by Leigh Brackett and Lawrence Kasdan.
Its director was John Madden, with sound mixing and post-production work done by Tom Voegeli.
Mark Hamill, Billy Dee Williams, and Anthony Daniels reprised their roles as Luke Skywalker, Lando Calrissian, and C-3PO respectively, with John Lithgow voicing Yoda.
This radio play was designed to last for five hours of radio time, usually presented in more than one part.
Radio agencies estimate that about 750,000 people tuned in to listen to this series radio play beginning on February 14, 1983.
In terms of the canonical Star Wars story, this radio drama has been given the highest designation, G-canon.
==
Legacy ==
The film was selected in 2010 to be preserved by the Library of Congress as part of its National Film Registry.
35 mm reels of the 1997 Special Edition were initially presented for preservation because of the difficulty of transferring from the original prints, but it was later revealed that the Library possessed a copyright deposit print of the original theatrical release.
===
Lasting reception ===
Although The Empire Strikes Back received mixed reviews from critics at the time of its release, the film has since grown in esteem; it is now widely heralded as the best film in the Star Wars saga and one of the greatest films ever made.
According to the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, 94% of critics have given the film a positive review based on 102 reviews, with an average rating of 8.97/10.
The site's critics consensus reads: "Dark, sinister, but ultimately even more involving than A New Hope, The Empire Strikes Back defies viewer expectations and takes the series to heightened emotional levels."
At Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 82 out of 100 based on 25 critics, indicating "universal acclaim".
Bob Stephens of the San Francisco Examiner described The Empire Strikes Back as "the greatest episode of the Star Wars Trilogy" in 1997.
In 2016, James Charisma of Playboy ranked the film #3 on a list of 15 Sequels That Are Way Better Than The Originals.
Roger Ebert described the film as the strongest and "most thought-provoking" film of the original trilogy.
Ian Nathan of Empire magazine gave the film a perfect five-star rating, proclaiming "it's generally agreed that The Empire Strikes Back is the best film of George Lucas' initial trilogy (despite a latter-day shift toward the original's storytelling purity).
Not a sequel as such, but the next part of a continuing story
, Empire marks enormous progression both in terms of the mythos of the series and in the filmmaking quality itself.
"
In 2014, the magazine's readers voted for the film as the greatest movie ever made, based on 250,000 votes.
Chuck Klosterman suggested that while "movies like Easy Rider and Saturday Night Fever painted living portraits for generations they represented in the present tense, The Empire Strikes Back might be the only example of a movie that set the social aesthetic for a generation coming in the future."

===
Cultural impact ===
In the 2014 Empire Magazine list, "The 301 Greatest Movies of All Time" voted by fans, The Empire Strikes Back was named as the greatest film ever made.
It was listed at number 2 on Empire's 2017 list of the 100 Greatest Movies.

===
Merchandise ===


====
Comics ====
A comic book adaptation of The Empire Strikes Back was released by Marvel Comics in 1980.
It was written by Archie Goodwin and illustrated by Al Williamson and Carlos Garzon.
It was published simultaneously in four formats: as a magazine (Marvel Super Special #16), an oversized tabloid edition
(Marvel Special Edition
Featuring Star Wars: The Empire Strikes Back), as part of a serialized comic book series, and as a paperback pocket book.
It has been noted by comic book historians and industry professionals that Marvel's Star Wars comics published prior to the release of The Empire Strikes Back include plot points similar to those used in the film, such as the Empire's counter-strike against the rebels after the destruction of the Death Star.
However, the film's makers have not acknowledged receiving any inspiration from the comic books.

====
Books ====
A novelization of the film was released on April 12, 1980, and published by Del Rey Books.
It was written by Donald F. Glut, and based on the film's screenplay.
Japanese artist Toshiki Kudo also adapted it into a manga comic book.
Lucasfilm adapted the story for a children's book-and-record set.
Released in 1980, the 24-page Star Wars:
The Empire Strikes Back
read-along book was accompanied by a ​33 1⁄3 rpm 7-inch gramophone record.
Each page of the book contained a cropped frame from the film with an abridged and condensed version of the story.
The record was produced by Buena Vista Records.

====
Video games ====
Video games based on the film have been released on several consoles.
Additionally, several Star Wars video games feature or mention key events seen in the film, but are not entirely based upon the film.

In 1982 Parker Brothers released Star Wars:
The Empire Strikes Back for the Atari 2600 games console, which featured the speeder attack on the AT-ATs on Hoth.
The arcade game
Star Wars:
The Empire Strikes Back followed in 1985.
The game features familiar battle sequences and characters played from a first-person perspective.
Specific battles include the Battle of Hoth and the subsequent escape of the Millennium Falcon through an asteroid field.
A conversion was released in 1988 for the ZX Spectrum, Amstrad CPC, Commodore 64, BBC Micro, Atari ST, and Commodore Amiga.
In 1992, JVC released the LucasArts-developed video game also titled Star Wars:
The Empire Strikes Back for the Nintendo Entertainment System (NES) console.
The player assumes the role of Luke Skywalker and maneuvers through Skywalker's story as seen in the film.
In 1992, Ubisoft released a version for the Game Boy.
Like its previous incarnation, it follows the story of Luke Skywalker.
Super Star Wars:
The Empire Strikes Back was developed for the console Super Nintendo Entertainment System (SNES) by LucasArts and was released by JVC in 1993.
The SNES game is similar in spots to the 1991 NES release, and is on a 12-megabit cartridge.

====
Pinball ====
Hankin released a pinball machine based on The Empire Strikes Back in 1980.
The machine was designed by David Hankin and was the last built by the manufacturer.

The Empire Strikes Back was the first Star Wars pinball machine ever created.
This game was first exhibited in November 1980 at the National Amusement Machine Operators Convention held at Surfers Paradise, Queensland, Australia.
A total of 350 units were produced and are sought-after collectors items.

==
Sequels and prequels ==


==
See also ==
The Story of Star Wars
List of films considered the best
List of films featuring extraterrestrials
List of Star Wars films
List of Star Wars television series


==
References ==
Footnotes
Citations


===
Sources ===


==
External links ==
Official website at starwars.com
Official website at Lucasfilm.com
Star Wars:
Episode V
The Empire Strikes Back on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
The Empire Strikes Back at IMDb
The Empire Strikes Back at the TCM Movie Database
The Empire Strikes Back at AllMovie
The Empire Strikes Back at Rotten Tomatoes
The Empire Strikes Back at Box Office Mojo
The Empire Strikes Back at Metacritic
Star Wars Ep.
V:
The Empire Strikes Back at The Numbers
Star Wars, Episode V:
The Empire Strikes Back at Filmsite.org
The Empire Strikes Back at the American Film Institute Catalog
The Empire Strikes Back essay by Daniel Eagan
In America's Film Legacy, 2009-2010: A Viewer's Guide To The 50 Landmark Movies Added To The National Film Registry
In 2009–10, Bloomsbury Publishing USA, 2011, ISBN 1441120025 pages 166
-169 [1]
Return of the Jedi (also known as Star Wars: Episode VI – Return of the Jedi)  is a 1983 American epic space opera film directed by Richard Marquand.
The screenplay is by Lawrence Kasdan and George Lucas from a story by Lucas, who was also the executive producer.
It is the third installment in the original Star Wars trilogy, the third film to be produced, and the sixth film in the "Skywalker saga".
It takes place one year after The Empire Strikes Back.
The film stars Mark Hamill, Harrison Ford, Carrie Fisher, Billy Dee Williams, Anthony Daniels, David Prowse, Kenny Baker, Peter Mayhew and Frank Oz.

In the film, the Galactic Empire, under the direction of the ruthless Emperor, is constructing a second Death Star in order to crush the Rebel Alliance once and for all.
Since the Emperor plans to personally oversee the final stages of its construction, the Rebel Fleet launches a full-scale attack on the Death Star in order to prevent its completion and kill the Emperor, effectively bringing an end to his hold over the galaxy.
Meanwhile, Luke Skywalker, now a Jedi Knight, struggles to bring his father Darth Vader back to the light side of the Force.

Steven Spielberg, David Lynch and David Cronenberg were considered to direct the project before Marquand signed on as director.
The production team relied on Lucas' storyboards during pre-production.
While writing the shooting script, Lucas, Kasdan, Marquand, and producer Howard Kazanjian spent two weeks in conference discussing ideas to construct it.
Kazanjian's schedule pushed shooting to begin a few weeks early to allow Industrial Light & Magic more time to work on the film's effects in post-production.
Filming took place in England, California, and Arizona from January to May 1982 (1982-05).
Strict secrecy surrounded the production.

The film was released in theaters on May 25, 1983, six years to the day of the release of the first film, receiving mostly positive reviews.
It grossed $374 million during its initial theatrical run, becoming the highest-grossing film of 1983.
Several re-releases and revisions to the film have followed over the decades, which has also brought its total gross to $475 million.

==
Plot ==
A year after Han Solo's capture, C-3PO and R2-D2 are sent to crime lord Jabba
the Hutt's palace on Tatooine in a trade bargain made by Luke Skywalker to rescue Han.
Disguised as the bounty hunter Boushh, Princess Leia infiltrates the palace under the pretense of collecting the bounty on Chewbacca and unfreezes Han, but is caught and enslaved.
Luke soon arrives to bargain for his friends' release, but Jabba drops him through a trapdoor to be eaten by a rancor.
After Luke kills it, Jabba sentences him, Han, and Chewbacca to death by being fed to the Sarlacc, a huge, carnivorous plant-like desert beast.
Having hidden his new lightsaber inside R2-D2, Luke frees himself and his friends, and they battle Jabba's men.
During the chaos, Boba Fett falls into the Sarlacc after Han inadvertently damages his jetpack, and Leia strangles Jabba to death with her chains.
The group then destroy Jabba's sail barge and escape before it explodes.

As the others rendezvous with the Rebel Alliance, Luke returns to Dagobah to complete his Jedi training with Yoda, whom he discovers is dying.
Yoda confirms that Darth Vader is Luke's father, before dying and becoming one with the Force he tells Luke with his dying breath that there is another Skywalker.
Obi-Wan Kenobi's Force ghost later appears to Luke and reveals that Leia is Luke's twin sister, and tells him that he must face Vader again to finish his training  and defeat the Empire.

The Alliance learns that the Empire has been constructing a second Death Star under the supervision of the Emperor himself.
As the station is protected by an energy shield, Han leads a strike team which includes Luke, Leia and Chewbacca to destroy the shield generator on the forest moon of Endor; doing so will allow the Rebel Fleet to destroy the Death Star.
The team uses a stolen Imperial shuttle to arrive undetected, and encounters a tribe of Ewoks, gaining their trust after an initial conflict.
Later, Luke tells Leia that she is his sister, Vader is their father, and that he must confront him.
Surrendering to Imperial troops, he is brought before Vader, and fails to convince his father to reject the dark side of the Force.

Vader takes Luke to meet the Emperor, who intends to turn him to the dark side, and reveals that his friends and the Rebel Fleet are headed into a trap.
On Endor, Han's team is captured by Imperial forces, but a counterattack by the Ewoks allows the Rebels to infiltrate the shield generator.
Meanwhile, Admiral Ackbar leads the rebel assault on the second Death Star with Lando Calrissian captaining the Millennium Falcon, on arrival they find that the stations shield is still active and that the Imperial fleet are waiting for them.

The Emperor reveals to Luke that the Death Star is fully operational and orders the firing of its massive superlaser, destroying a Rebel starship.
He then tempts Luke to give in to his anger.
Luke attempts to attack him, but Vader intervenes and the two engage in a lightsaber duel.
Vader senses that Luke has a sister and threatens to turn her to the dark side.
Enraged, Luke defeats Vader, severing his prosthetic hand.
The Emperor entreats Luke to kill Vader and take his place, but Luke refuses, declaring himself a Jedi like his father before him.
Furious, the Emperor attacks Luke with Force lightning.
Unwilling to let his son die, Vader betrays the Emperor and throws him down a reactor shaft to his death, but is mortally wounded in the process.
At his father's last request, Luke removes Vader's mask, and the redeemed Anakin Skywalker dies.

After the strike team destroys the shield generator, the Millenium Falcon leads a group of Rebel fighters into the Death Star's core.
While the Rebel fleet destroys the Super Star Destroyer Executor, Lando and X-wing fighter pilot Wedge Antilles destroy the Death Star's main reactor, escaping from the station's infrastructure before it explodes.
Luke also escapes in a shuttle with his father's body.
On Endor, Leia reveals to Han that Luke is her brother.
Luke later cremates his father's body on a pyre before reuniting with his friends.
As the Rebels and the galaxy celebrate the Empire's defeat, Luke sees the spirits of Yoda, Obi-Wan, and Anakin watching over him.

== Cast ==
Mark Hamill as Luke Skywalker, one of the last living Jedi Knights, trained by Obi-Wan Kenobi and Yoda; Leia's twin brother, Han's friend and Darth Vader's son who is also a member of the Rebellion.

Harrison Ford as Han Solo, a rogue smuggler and captain of the Millennium Falcon who has become a General in the Rebellion; Luke's friend, and Leia's love interest.

Carrie Fisher as Leia Organa, the former princess of the destroyed planet Alderaan, who is a leader of the Rebellion, Luke's twin sister, and Han's love interest.

Billy Dee Williams as Lando Calrissian, the former Administrator of Cloud City who has become a General in the Rebellion; Han's old friend and the previous owner of the Millennium Falcon.

Anthony Daniels as C-3PO, a humanoid protocol droid in the service of the Rebellion and longtime companion of R2-D2.

Peter Mayhew as Chewbacca, a Wookiee smuggler who is Han's longtime friend, co-pilot of the Millennium Falcon, and part of the Rebellion.

Kenny Baker as
R2-D2, an astromech droid in the service of the Rebellion, friend of Luke, and longtime companion of C-3PO.

Paploo, an Ewok from the tribe who live on Endor.

Ian McDiarmid as The Emperor, the founder and supreme ruler of the Galactic Empire, and Darth Vader's Sith master.

Frank Oz as Yoda, a wise, centuries-old Jedi Master of an unknown alien species, who lives in exile on Dagobah and trained Luke.

David Prowse as Darth Vader, a powerful Sith Lord, the Emperor's apprentice, and second-in-command of the Empire; Luke and Leia's father.

James Earl Jones as the voice of Darth Vader.

Sebastian Shaw portrays the unmasked Anakin Skywalker.
Alec Guinness as Obi-Wan Kenobi, the deceased Jedi mentor of Luke, and of his father before him, who continues to guide Luke in his journey as a Force ghost.
Denis Lawson reprises his role as Wedge Antilles, a X-wing pilot in the Rebellion, from the previous two films.
Kenneth Colley and Jeremy Bulloch reprise their roles from The Empire Strikes Back as Admiral Piett, the commander of Darth Vader's flagship, Executor, and bounty hunter Boba Fett, respectively.
Michael Pennington portrays Moff Jerjerrod, the commander of the second Death Star.
Warwick Davis appears as Wicket W. Warrick, an Ewok who befriends Leia and leads her and her friends to the Ewok tribe.
Baker was originally cast as Wicket, but was replaced by Davis after falling ill with food poisoning on the morning of the shoot.
Davis had no previous acting experience and was cast only after his grandmother had discovered an open call for dwarfs for the new Star Wars film.
Caroline Blakiston portrays Mon Mothma, a co-founder and leader of the Rebel Alliance.
Michael Carter plays Jabba the Hutt's aide, Bib Fortuna (voiced by Erik Bauersfeld), while Femi Taylor and Claire Davenport appear as Jabba's original slave dancers.

To portray the numerous alien species featured in the film a multitude of puppeteers, voice actors, and stunt performers were employed.
Admiral Ackbar, the commander of the Rebel Fleet during the Battle of Endor, was performed by puppeteer Tim Rose, with his voice provided by Erik Bauersfeld.
Nien Nunb, who co-pilots the Millennium Falcon alongside Lando in the film, was portrayed by Richard Bonehill in costume for full body shots, while he was otherwise a puppet operated by Mike Quinn and his voice was provided by Kipsang Rotich.
Rose also operated Salacious B. Crumb, whose voice was provided by Mark Dodson.
Quinn also played Ree-Yees and Wol Cabbashite.
Sy Snootles was a marionette operated by Rose and Quinn, while her voice was provided by Annie Arbogast.
Others included Simon J. Williamson as Max Rebo, a Gamorrean Guard and a Mon Calamari; Deep Roy as Droopy McCool; Ailsa Berk as Amanaman; Paul Springer as Ree-Yees, Gamorrean Guard and a Mon Calamari; Hugh Spight as a Gamorrean Guard, Elom and a Mon Calamari; Swee Lim as Attark the Hoover; Richard Robinson as a Yuzzum; Gerald Home as Tessek and a Mon Calamari officer; Phil Herbert as Hermi Odle; Tik and Tok
(Tim Dry and Sean Crawford)
as Whiphid and Yak-Face; Phil Tippett as the Rancor with Michael McCormick; and Pat Welsh as the voice of Boushh.

Jabba the Hutt was operated by Toby Philpott, David Barclay and Mike Edmonds (who also portrays the Ewok Logray) operated the tail.
Larry Ward portrays the Huttese language voice with Quinn, among other roles, controlling the eyes.

==
Production ==


===
Development ===
As with the previous film, Lucas personally financed Return of the Jedi.
Lucas also chose not to direct Return of the Jedi himself, and started searching for a director.
Although Lucas' first choice was Steven Spielberg, their separate feuds with the Director's Guild led to his being banned from directing the film.
Lucas approached David Lynch, who had been nominated for the Academy Award for Best Director for The Elephant Man in 1980, to helm Return of the Jedi, but Lynch declined, saying that he had "next door to zero interest".
David Cronenberg was also offered the chance to direct, but he declined the offer to make Videodrome and The Dead Zone.
Lamont Johnson, director of Spacehunter: Adventures in the Forbidden Zone, was also considered.
Lucas eventually chose Richard Marquand.
Lucas may have directed some of the second unit work personally as the shooting threatened to go over schedule; this is a function Lucas had willingly performed on previous occasions when he had only officially been producing a film (e.g. More American Graffiti, Raiders of the Lost Ark).
Lucas did operate the B camera on the set a few times.
Lucas himself has admitted to being on the set frequently because of Marquand's relative inexperience with special effects.
Lucas praised Marquand as a "very nice person who worked well with actors".
Marquand did note that Lucas kept a conspicuous presence on set, joking, "
It is rather like trying to direct King Lear – with Shakespeare in the next room!"

The screenplay was written by Lawrence Kasdan and Lucas (with uncredited contributions by David Peoples and Marquand), based on Lucas' story.
Kasdan claims he told Lucas that Return of the Jedi was "a weak title", and Lucas later decided to name the film Revenge of the Jedi.
The screenplay itself was not finished until rather late in pre-production, well after a production schedule and budget had been created by Kazanjian and Marquand
had been hired, which was unusual for a film.
Instead, the production team relied on Lucas' story and rough draft in order to commence work with the art department.
When it came time to formally write a shooting script, Lucas, Kasdan, Marquand and Kazanjian spent two weeks in conference discussing ideas; Kasdan used tape transcripts of these meetings to then construct the script.
The issue of whether Harrison Ford would return for the final film arose during pre-production.
Unlike the other stars of the first film, Ford had not contracted to do two sequels, and Raiders of the Lost Ark had made him an even bigger star.
Return of the Jedi producer Howard Kazanjian (who also produced Raiders of the Lost Ark) convinced Ford to return:
I played a very important part in bringing Harrison back for Return of the Jedi.
Harrison, unlike Carrie Fisher and Mark Hamill signed only a two picture contract.
That is why he was frozen in carbonite in The Empire Strikes Back.
When I suggested to George we should bring him back, I distinctly remember him saying that Harrison would never return.
I said what if I convinced him to return.
George simply replied that we would then write him in to Jedi.
I had just recently negotiated his deal for Raiders of the Lost Ark with Phil Gersh of the Gersh Agency.
I called Phil who said he would speak with Harrison.
When I called back again, Phil was on vacation.
David, his son, took the call and we negotiated Harrison's deal.
When Phil returned to the office several weeks later he called me back and said I had taken advantage of his son in the negotiations.
I had not.
But agents are agents.

Ford suggested that Han Solo be killed through self-sacrifice.
Kasdan concurred, saying it should happen near the beginning of the third act to instill doubt as to whether the others would survive, but Lucas was vehemently against it and rejected the concept.
Gary Kurtz, who produced Star Wars and The Empire Strikes Back but was replaced as producer for Return of the Jedi by Kazanjian, said in 2010 that the ongoing success with Star Wars merchandise and toys led George Lucas to reject the idea of killing off Han Solo in the middle part of the film during a raid on an Imperial base.
Luke Skywalker was also to have walked off alone and exhausted like the hero in a Spaghetti Western but, according to Kurtz, Lucas opted for a happier ending to encourage higher merchandise sales.
Harrison Ford himself has agreed with this sentiment, saying that Lucas "didn't see any future in dead Han toys.
"Yoda was originally not meant to appear in the film, but Marquand strongly felt that returning to Dagobah was essential to resolve the dilemma raised by the previous film.
The inclusion led Lucas to insert a scene in which Yoda confirms that Darth Vader is Luke's father because, after a discussion with a children's psychologist, he did not want younger moviegoers to dismiss Vader's claim as a lie.
Many ideas from the original script were left out or changed.
For instance, the Ewoks were going to be Wookiees and the Millennium Falcon would be used in the arrival at the forest moon of Endor.
Following the defeat of the Emperor, the film was originally intended to end with Obi-Wan Kenobi and Yoda returning to life from their spectral existence in the Force, along with Anakin Skywalker, thanks to Yoda being able to prevent him from becoming one with the Force.
They would then join the rest of the characters in their celebration on Endor.

===
Filming ===
Filming began on January 11, 1982, and lasted through May 20, 1982, a schedule six weeks shorter than The Empire Strikes Back.
Kazanjian's schedule pushed shooting as early as possible in order to give Industrial Light & Magic (ILM) as much time as possible to work on effects, and left some crew members dubious of their ability to be fully prepared for the shoot.
Working on a budget of $32.5 million, Lucas was determined to avoid going over budget as had happened with The Empire Strikes Back.
Producer Howard Kazanjian estimated that using ILM (owned wholly by Lucasfilm) for special effects saved the production approximately $18 million.
However, the fact that Lucasfilm was a non-union company made acquiring shooting locations more difficult and more expensive, even though Star Wars and The Empire Strikes Back had been big hits.
The project was given the working title Blue Harvest with a tagline of "Horror Beyond Imagination."
This disguised what the production crew was really filming from fans and the press, and also prevented price gouging by service providers.
The first stage of production started with 78 days at Elstree Studios in England, where the film occupied all nine stages.
The shoot commenced with a scene later deleted from the finished film where the heroes get caught in a sandstorm as they leave Tatooine.
(
This was the only major sequence cut from the film during editing.)
While attempting to film Luke Skywalker's battle with the rancor beast, Lucas insisted on trying to create the scene in the same style as Toho's Godzilla films by using a stunt performer inside a suit.
The production team made several attempts, but were unable to create an adequate result.
Lucas eventually relented and decided to film the rancor as a high-speed puppet.
In April, the crew moved to the Yuma Desert in Arizona for two weeks of Tatooine exteriors.
Production then moved to the redwood forests of northern California near Crescent City where two weeks were spent shooting the Endor forest exteriors, and then concluded at ILM in San Rafael, California for about ten days of bluescreen shots.
One of two "skeletal" post-production units shooting background matte plates spent a day in Death Valley.
The other was a special Steadicam unit shooting forest backgrounds from June 15–17, 1982, for the speeder chase near the middle of the film.
Steadicam inventor Garrett Brown personally operated these shots as he walked through a disguised path inside the forest shooting at less than one frame per second.
By walking at about 5 mph (8 km/h) and projecting the footage at 24 frame/s, the motion seen in the film appeared as if it were moving at around 120 mph (190 km/h).
Darth Vader's small funeral was filmed at Skywalker Ranch.

Harrison Ford altered some scenes during the shoot, causing Billy Dee Williams to forget some of his lines, which was a source of frustration for Marquand.
Marquand and Anthony Daniels also clashed somewhat, leading to the latter recording his ADR with Lucas instead.

===
Music ===
John Williams composed and conducted the film's musical score with performances by the London Symphony Orchestra.
Orchestration credits also include Thomas Newman.
The initial release of the film's soundtrack was on the RSO Records label in the United States.
Sony Classical Records acquired the rights to the classic trilogy scores in 2004 after gaining the rights to release the second trilogy soundtracks (The Phantom Menace and Attack of the Clones).
In the same year, Sony Classical re-pressed the 1997 RCA Victor release of Return of the Jedi along with the other two films in the trilogy.
The set was released with the new artwork mirroring the first DVD release of the film.
Despite the Sony digital re-mastering, which minimally improved the sound heard only on high-end stereos, this 2004 release is essentially the same as the 1997 RCA Victor release.

===
Post-production ===
Meanwhile, special effects work at ILM quickly stretched the company to its operational limits.
While the R&D work and experience gained from the previous two films in the trilogy allowed for increased efficiency, this was offset by the desire to have the closing film raise the bar set by each of these films.
A compounding factor was the intention of several departments of ILM to either take on other film work or decrease staff during slow cycles.
Instead, as soon as production began, the entire company found it necessary to remain running 20 hours a day on six-day weeks in order to meet their goals by April 1, 1983.
Of about 900 special effects shots, all VistaVision optical effects remained in-house, since ILM was the only company capable of using the format, while about 400 4-perf opticals were subcontracted to outside effects houses.
Progress on the opticals was severely delayed for a time when ILM rejected about 30,000 metres (100,000 ft) of film when the film perforations failed image registration and steadiness tests.

==
Release ==
Return of the Jedi's theatrical release took place on May 25, 1983.
It was originally slated to be May 27, but was subsequently changed to coincide with the date of the 1977 release of the original Star Wars film.
With a massive worldwide marketing campaign, illustrator Tim Reamer created the image for the movie poster and other advertising.
At the time of its release, the film was advertised on posters and merchandise as simply Star Wars:
Return of the Jedi, despite its on-screen "Episode VI" distinction.
The original film was later re-released to theaters in 1985.In 1997, for the 20th anniversary of the release of Star Wars (re-titled Episode IV: A New Hope), Lucas released the Star Wars Trilogy:
Special Edition.
Along with the two other films in the original trilogy, Return of the Jedi was re-released on March 7, 1997, with a number of changes and additions, which included the insertion of several alien band members and a different song in Jabba's throne room, the modification of the Sarlacc to include a beak, the replacement of music at the closing scene, and a montage of different alien worlds celebrating the fall of the Empire.

===
Title change ===
The original teaser trailer for the film carried the name Revenge of the Jedi.
In December 1982, Lucas decided that "Revenge" was not appropriate as Jedi should never seek revenge and returned to his original title.
By that time thousands of "Revenge" teaser posters (with artwork by Drew Struzan) had been printed and distributed.
Lucasfilm stopped the shipping of the posters and sold the remaining stock of 6,800 posters to Star Wars fan club members for $9.50.Star Wars:
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith, released in 2005 as part of the prequel trilogy, later alluded to the dismissed title Revenge of the Jedi.

===
Home media ===
The original theatrical version of Return of the Jedi was released on VHS and Laserdisc several times between 1986 and 1995, followed by releases of the Special Edition in the same formats between 1997 and 2000.
Some of these releases contained featurettes; some were individual releases of just this film, while others were boxed sets of all three original films.

On September 21, 2004, all three original films were released in a boxed set on DVD with additional changes made by George Lucas.
The films were digitally restored and remastered, and the DVD also featured English subtitles, Dolby Digital 5.1 EX surround sound, and commentaries by George Lucas, Ben Burtt, Dennis Muren, and Carrie Fisher.
The bonus disc included documentaries including Empire of Dreams: The Story of the Star Wars Trilogy and several featurettes including "The Characters of Star Wars", "The Birth of the Lightsaber", and "The Legacy of Star Wars".
Also included were teasers, trailers, TV spots, still galleries, and a demo for Star Wars: Battlefront.

With the release of Episode III: Revenge of the Sith, which depicts how and why Anakin Skywalker turned to the dark side of the Force, Lucas once again altered Return of the Jedi to bolster the relationship between the original trilogy and the prequel trilogy.
The original and 1997 Special Edition versions of Return of the Jedi featured British theater actor Sebastian Shaw playing both the dying Anakin Skywalker and his ghost.
In the 2004 DVD, Shaw's portrayal of Anakin's ghost is replaced by Hayden Christensen, who portrayed Anakin in Attack of the Clones and Revenge of the Sith.
All three films in the original unaltered Star Wars trilogy were later released, individually, on DVD on September 12, 2006.
These versions were originally slated to be available only until December 31, 2006, although they remained in print until May 2011 and were packaged with the 2004 versions again in a new box set on November 4, 2008.

Although the 2004 versions in these sets each feature an audio commentary, no other extra special features were included to commemorate the original cuts.
The runtime of the 1997 Special Edition of the film and all subsequent releases is approximately five minutes longer than the original theatrical version.

A Blu-ray Disc version of the Star Wars saga was announced for release in 2011 during Star Wars Celebration V. Several deleted scenes from Return of the Jedi were included for the Blu-ray version, including a sandstorm sequence following the Battle at the Sarlacc Pit, a scene featuring Moff Jerjerrod and Death Star officers during the Battle of Endor, and a scene where Darth Vader communicates with Luke via the Force as Skywalker is assembling his new lightsaber before he infiltrates Jabba's palace.
On January 6, 2011, 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment announced the Blu-ray release for September 2011 in three different editions and the cover art was unveiled in
May.
On April 7, 2015, Walt Disney Studios, 20th Century Fox, and Lucasfilm jointly announced the digital releases of the six released Star Wars films.
Return of the Jedi was released through the iTunes Store, Amazon Video, Vudu, Google Play, and Disney Movies
Anywhere on April 10, 2015.Walt
Disney Studios Home Entertainment reissued Return of the Jedi on Blu-ray, DVD, and digital download on September 22, 2019.
Additionally, all six films were available for 4K HDR and Dolby Atmos streaming on Disney+ upon the service's launch on November 12, 2019.
This version of the film was released by Disney on 4K Ultra HD Blu-ray box set on March 31, 2020.

== Reception ==


===
Box office ===
Return of the Jedi grossed $309.3 million in the United States and Canada, and $166 million in other territories, for a worldwide total of $475.3 million, against a production budget of about $32.5 million.
The film made $23 million from 1,002 theaters in its opening weekend and grossed a record $45.3 million in its opening week.
It finished first at the box office for six of its first seven weeks of release, only coming in second once behind Superman III in its fourth weekend.
Box Office Mojo estimates that
the film sold over 80 million tickets in the US in its initial theatrical run.
When it was re-released in 1985, it made $11.2 million, which totaled its initial theatrical gross to $385.8 million worldwide.

===
Critical response ===
According to the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, 82% of critics have given the film a positive review with an average rating of 7.25/10, based on 95 reviews from critics.
The site's critics consensus reads: "Though failing to reach the cinematic heights of its predecessors, Return of the Jedi remains an entertaining sci-fi adventure and a fitting end to the classic trilogy.
"
At Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 58 out of 100 based on 24 reviews from mainstream critics, indicating "mixed or average reviews".
In 1983, film critic Roger Ebert gave the film four stars out of four, calling it "a complete entertainment, a feast for the eyes and a delight for the fancy.
It's a little amazing how Lucas and his associates keep topping themselves."
Gene Siskel of the Chicago Tribune also gave the film four stars out of four and wrote, "From the moment that the familiar Star Wars introductory words begin to crawl up the screen, Return of the Jedi is a childlike delight.
It's the best video game around.
And for the professional moviegoers, it is particularly enjoyable to watch every facet of filmmaking at its best."
James Harwood of Variety called the film "a visual treat throughout," but thought that "Hamill is not enough of a dramatic actor to carry the plot load here" and Harrison Ford "is present more in body than in spirit this time, given little to do but react to special effects.
And it can't be said that either Carrie Fisher or Billy Dee Williams rise to previous efforts.
But Lucas and director Richard Marquand have overwhelmed these performer flaws with a truly amazing array of creatures, old and new, plus the familiar space hardware."
Sheila Benson of the Los Angeles Times wrote that the film "is fully satisfying, it gives honest value to all the hopes of its believers.
With this last of the central Star Wars cycle, there is the sense of the closing of a circle, of leaving behind real friends.
It is accomplished with a weight and a new maturity that seem entirely fitting, yet the movie has lost none of its sense of fun; it bursts with new inventiveness.
"Gary
Arnold of The Washington Post said, "Return of the Jedi, a feat of mass enchantment, puts the happy finishing touches on George Lucas' Star Wars saga.
It was worth the wait, and the work is now an imposing landmark in contemporary popular culture—a three-part, 6¼-hour science-fiction epic of unabashed heroic proclivities.
"
The film was also featured on the May 23, 1983, TIME magazine cover issue (where it was labeled "Star Wars III"), where the reviewer Gerald Clarke said that while it was not as exciting as the first Star Wars film, it was "better and more satisfying" than The Empire Strikes Back, now considered by many as the best of the original trilogy.
Vincent Canby of The New York Times called Return of the Jedi "by far the dimmest adventure of the lot" and stated, "The joys of watching space battles as envisioned by wizards in studios and laboratories are not inexhaustible."
Pauline Kael of The New Yorker stated, "Some of the trick effects might seem miraculous if the imagery had any lustre, but Return of the Jedi is an impersonal and rather junky piece of moviemaking.
"Christopher
John reviewed The Return of the Jedi in Ares Magazine #15 and commented that "Star Wars may not be dead, but Return of the Jedi is a failure, and is a cheap and tarnished crown for the series which shook the world of film when it started out . . .
a long time ago, in that galaxy far, far away.
"Colin
Greenland reviewed Return of the Jedi for Imagine magazine, and stated that "You would think a series like Star Wars, fuelled by public adoration, coasting along on the hyperdrive of its own hyperboles, would get inexorably worse.
It is not.
It is getting better.
"James
Kendrick of Q Network Film Desk, reviewing the 1997 Special Edition re-release, assessed Return of the Jedi as "the least of the three" original films, but "still a magnificent experience in its own right.
Its main problem is that it tends to lean too much on the slick commercialism generated by the first two installments."
ReelViews.net's James Berardinelli wrote of the Special Edition:

Although it was great fun
re-watching Star Wars and The Empire
Strikes Back again on the big screen
, Return of the Jedi doesn't generate the same sense of enjoyment.
And, while Lucas worked diligently to re-invigorate each entry into the trilogy, Jedi needs more than the patches of improved sound, cleaned-up visuals, and a few new scenes.
Still, despite the flaws, this is still Star Wars, and, as such, represents a couple of lightly-entertaining hours spent with characters we have gotten to know and love over the years.
Return of the Jedi is easily the weakest of the series, but its position as the conclusion makes it a must-see for anyone who has enjoyed its predecessor.

While the Sarlacc battle sequence, the speeder bike chase, the space battle, and Luke's duel against Vader are all well-regarded, the battle between Ewoks and stormtroopers remains controversial.
Fans are divided on the likelihood of Ewoks (being a primitive race of small creatures) defeating an armed ground force comprising the Empire's "best troops".
Lucas has defended the scenario, saying that the Ewoks' purpose was to distract the Imperial troops and they did not really win.
His inspiration for the Ewoks' victory came from the Vietnam War, where the indigenous Vietcong forces prevailed against the technologically superior United States.

===
Accolades ===
At the 56th Academy Awards in 1984, Richard Edlund, Dennis Muren, Ken Ralston, and Phil Tippett received the "Special Achievement Award for Visual Effects."
Norman Reynolds, Fred Hole, James L. Schoppe, and Michael Ford were nominated for "Best Art Direction/Set Decoration".
Ben Burtt received a nomination for "Best Sound Effects Editing".
John Williams received the nomination for "Best Music, Original Score".
Burtt, Gary Summers, Randy Thom and Tony Dawe all received the nominations for "Best Sound".
At the 1984 BAFTA Awards, Edlund, Muren, Ralston, and Kit West won for "Best Special Visual Effects".
Tippett and Stuart Freeborn were also nominated for "Best Makeup".
Reynolds received a nomination for "Best Production Design/Art Direction".
Burtt, Dawe, and Summers also received nominations for "Best Sound".
Williams was also nominated "Best Album of Original Score Written for a Motion Picture or Television Special".
The film also won for "Best Dramatic Presentation", the older award for science fiction and fantasy in film, at the 1984 Hugo Awards.

American Film Institute Lists
AFI's 100 Years ...
100 Movies – Nominated
AFI's 100 Years ...
100 Thrills –
Nominated


==
Marketing ==


===
Novelization ===
The novelization of Return of the Jedi was written by James Kahn and was released on May 12, 1983, thirteen days before the film's release.
===
Radio drama ===
A radio drama adaptation of the film was written by Brian Daley with additional material contributed by John Whitman and was produced for and broadcast on National Public Radio in 1996.
It was based on characters and situations created by George Lucas and on the screenplay by Lawrence Kasdan and George Lucas.
The first two Star Wars films were similarly adapted for National Public Radio in the early 1980s, but it was not until 1996 that a radio version of Return of the Jedi was heard.
Anthony Daniels returned as C-3PO, but Mark Hamill and Billy Dee Williams did not reprise their roles as they had for the first two radio dramas.
They were replaced by newcomer Joshua Fardon as Luke Skywalker and character actor Arye Gross as Lando Calrissian.
John Lithgow voiced Yoda, whose voice actor in the films has always been Frank Oz.
Bernard Behrens returned as Obi-Wan Kenobi and Brock Peters reprised his role as Darth Vader.
Veteran character actor Ed Begley, Jr. played Boba Fett.
Edward Asner also guest-starred speaking only in grunts as the voice of Jabba the Hutt.
The radio drama had a running time of three hours.

===
Comic book adaptation ===
Marvel Comics published a comic book adaptation of the film by writer Archie Goodwin and artists Al Williamson, Carlos Garzon, Tom Palmer, and Ron Frenz.
The adaptation appeared in Marvel Super Special #27 and as a four-issue limited series.
It was later reprinted in a mass market paperback.
===
Book-and-record set ===
Lucasfilm adapted the story for a children's book-and-record set.
Released in 1983, the 24-page Star Wars: Return of the Jedi read-along book was accompanied by a 33⅓ rpm 18-centimetre (7 in) gramophone record.
Each page of the book contained a cropped frame from the film with an abridged and condensed version of the story.
The record was produced by Buena Vista Records.

== See also ==
List of films featuring extraterrestrials
List of films featuring space stations
List of Star Wars films
List of Star Wars television series
Princess Leia's bikini


==
References ==
FootnotesCitations


===
Sources ===


==
External links ==
Official website at StarWars.com
Official website at Lucasfilm.com
Star Wars:
Episode VI Return of the Jedi on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Return of the Jedi at IMDb
Return of the Jedi at the TCM Movie Database
Return of the Jedi at AllMovie
Return of the Jedi at Rotten Tomatoes
Return of the Jedi at Box Office Mojo
Return of the Jedi at Metacritic
Return of the Jedi at The Numbers
Return of the Jedi at the American Film Institute Catalog
Star Wars:
Episode
I –
The Phantom Menace is a 1999 American epic space-opera film written and directed by George Lucas, produced by Lucasfilm, distributed by 20th Century Fox and stars Liam Neeson, Ewan McGregor, Natalie Portman, Jake Lloyd, Ian McDiarmid, Anthony Daniels, Kenny Baker, Pernilla August, and Frank Oz.
It is the first installment in the Star Wars prequel trilogy and begins the "Skywalker saga," though it was the fourth film to be produced.
Set 32 years before the original trilogy, during the era of the Galactic Republic, the plot follows Jedi Master Qui-Gon Jinn and his apprentice Obi-Wan Kenobi as they try to protect Queen Padmé Amidala of Naboo in hopes of securing a peaceful end to an interplanetary trade dispute.
Joined by Anakin Skywalker—a young slave with unusually strong natural powers of the Force—they simultaneously contend with the mysterious return of the Sith.

Lucas began production of The Phantom Menace after he determined that computer-generated imagery (CGI) had advanced to the level he wanted for the prequel trilogy's visual effects.
Filming started on June 26, 1997, at locations including Leavesden Film Studios and the Tunisian desert.
The film was Lucas's first directorial effort after a 22-year hiatus following the original Star Wars in 1977.

The Phantom Menace was released in theaters on May 19, 1999, almost 16 years after the premiere of the previous Star Wars film, Return of the Jedi.
The film's premiere was extensively covered by media and was greatly anticipated because of the large cultural following the Star Wars saga had cultivated.
Despite the anticipation, it received mixed reviews.
While the visual effects, action sequences, musical score, and some performances (particularly Neeson and McGregor) were praised, criticism largely focused on the screenplay, characterization, pacing, and the character of Jar Jar Binks.
It grossed more than $924.3 million (equivalent to $1.42 billion in 2019) worldwide during its initial theatrical run, becoming the highest-grossing film of 1999, the second-highest-grossing film worldwide and in North America (behind Titanic), and the highest-grossing Star Wars film at the time.
A 3D reissue, which earned an additional $102.7 million at the box office and brought the film's overall worldwide takings to over $1 billion, was released in February 2012.
Two sequels within the prequel trilogy have been released: Attack of the Clones (2002) and Revenge of the Sith (2005).
==
Plot ==
The Trade Federation upsets order in the Galactic Republic by blockading the planet Naboo in preparation for a full-scale invasion.
The Republic's leader, Supreme Chancellor Finis Valorum, dispatches
Jedi Knight Qui-Gon Jinn and his apprentice, Obi-Wan Kenobi, to negotiate with Trade Federation Viceroy Nute Gunray.
Darth Sidious, a Sith Lord and the Trade Federation's secret benefactor, orders the Viceroy to kill the Jedi and begin their invasion with an army of battle droids.
The Jedi escape and flee to Naboo.
During the invasion, Qui-Gon saves the life of a Gungan outcast, Jar Jar Binks.
Indebted to Qui-Gon, Jar Jar leads the Jedi to Otoh Gunga, the Gungans' underwater city.
The Jedi fail to persuade the Gungan leader, Boss Nass, to help the planet's surface dwellers, but manage to obtain Jar Jar's guidance and underwater transport to Theed, the capital city of Naboo.
After rescuing Queen Padmé Amidala, the group make their escape from Naboo aboard her Royal Starship, intending to reach the Republic capital planet of Coruscant.

Passing through the Federation blockade, the ship is damaged in the crossfire and its hyperdrive is rendered useless.
The group land for repairs on the outlying desert planet of Tatooine, situated beyond the Republic's jurisdiction.
Qui-Gon, Jar Jar, astromech droid R2-D2, and Padmé—disguised as one of her handmaidens—visit the settlement of Mos Espa to purchase a new part for their hyperdrive.
They encounter a junk dealer, Watto, and his nine-year-old slave, Anakin Skywalker, a gifted pilot and engineer who has built a protocol droid, C-3PO.

Qui-Gon senses a strong presence of the Force within Anakin, and is convinced that he is the prophesied "Chosen One," destined to restore balance to the Force.
With Watto refusing to accept payment in Republic currency, Qui-Gon wagers both the required hyperdrive part and Anakin's freedom in a podrace.
Anakin wins the race and joins the group to be trained as a Jedi, leaving behind his mother, Shmi.
En route to their starship, Qui-Gon is attacked by Darth Maul, Sidious' apprentice, who was sent to capture Amidala.
After a brief lightsaber duel, Qui-Gon escapes onboard the starship with the others.

Qui-Gon and Obi-Wan escort Padmé to Coruscant so that she can plead her people's case to Valorum and the Galactic Senate.
Qui-Gon asks the Jedi Council for permission to train Anakin as a Jedi, but the Council refuses, concerned that Anakin is vulnerable to the dark side of the Force.
Undaunted, Qui-Gon vows to take up Anakin as his new apprentice.
Meanwhile, Naboo's Senator Palpatine persuades Amidala to call for a vote of no confidence in Valorum to elect a more capable leader and to resolve the crisis.
Though she is successful in pushing for the vote, Amidala grows frustrated with the corruption in the Senate and decides to return to Naboo.
Qui-Gon and Obi-Wan are ordered by the Jedi Council to accompany the queen and investigate the return of the Sith, whom they had believed to be extinct for more than a millennium.

On Naboo, Padmé reveals herself as the queen before the Gungans to gain their trust, and persuades them to help against the Trade Federation.
Jar Jar is promoted to general and joins his tribe in a battle against the droid army, while Padmé leads the search for Gunray in Theed.
Anakin is told by Qui-Gon to hide in a starfighter alongside R2 in the hangar, but accidentally triggers its autopilot and flies into space, where he takes part in the battle against the Federation droid control ship, inadvertently causing its destruction from within, which deactivates the droid army.
Maul, who has been dispatched by Darth Sidious to capture Amidala, engages Qui-Gon and Obi-Wan in a lightsaber duel; he mortally wounds Qui-Gon, but is defeated by Obi-Wan.

Qui-Gon asks Obi-Wan to train Anakin before dying in his arms.

Following the battle, Gunray is arrested by the Republic, and Palpatine is elected Chancellor.
Master Yoda promotes Obi-Wan to the rank of Jedi Knight, and reluctantly accepts Anakin as Obi-Wan's apprentice.
A funeral is held for Qui-Gon, attended by the other Jedi, who contemplate that there is still one Sith remaining since there are always two of them.
During a celebratory parade on Naboo, Padmé presents a gift of thanks to the Gungans to establish peace.

== Cast ==
Liam Neeson as Qui-Gon Jinn, a Jedi Master who discovers Anakin and under the belief that he is destined to bring balance to the force as the prophesied "Chosen One", insists that the boy be trained as a Jedi, despite the Jedi Council's refusal to do so.
Lucas originally wanted to cast an American actor in the role, but cast Neeson (who is Northern Irish) because he considered that Neeson had great skills and presence.
Lucas said Neeson was a "master actor, who the other actors will look up to, who has got the qualities of strength that the character demands.
"
Ewan McGregor as Obi-Wan Kenobi, Qui-Gon's twenty-five-year-old Jedi Padawan, who holds his master in high regard but questions his motives at times, especially when it seems he is breaking the rules of the Jedi.
McGregor was cast from a shortlist of fifty actors, all of whom had to be compared to pictures of young Alec Guinness, who portrayed the elderly Obi-Wan, to make a believable younger version.
McGregor had a vocal coach to help his voice sound closer to Guinness's.
He also studied several of Guinness's performances, from his early work and the original Star Wars films.

Natalie Portman as Queen Padmé Amidala, the fourteen-year-old Queen of Naboo, who hopes to protect her planet from the Trade Federation's blockade invasion.
Throughout most of the film, she uses the name Padmé Naberrie and poses as one of the queen's handmaidens for protection.
Over 200 actresses auditioned for the role.
The production notes stated that "The role required a young woman who could be believable as the ruler of that planet, but at the same time be vulnerable and open".
Portman was chosen especially for her performances in Léon:
The Professional (1994) and Beautiful Girls (1996), which impressed Lucas.
He stated, "I was looking for someone who was young, strong, along the lines of Leia [and]
Natalie embodied all those traits and more".
Portman was unfamiliar with Star Wars before being cast, but was enthusiastic about being cast as a character she expected to become a role model.
Portman said, "It was wonderful playing a young queen with so much power.
I think it will be good for young women to see a strong woman of action who is also smart and a leader."

Jake Lloyd as Anakin Skywalker, a nine-year-old slave boy and a skilled pilot who dreams of becoming a Jedi.
Hundreds of actors were tested across the UK, Ireland, Canada, and the United States before the producers settled on Lloyd, who Lucas considered met his requirements of "a good actor, enthusiastic and very energetic".
Producer Rick McCallum said that Lloyd was "smart, mischievous, and loves anything mechanical—just like Anakin."

Ian McDiarmid as Senator Palpatine / Darth Sidious, a middle aged senator of Naboo who is later elected Supreme Chancellor of the Galactic Republic, as well as a secret Sith Lord and the Trade Federation's benefactor.
McDiarmid was surprised when Lucas approached him sixteen years after Return of the Jedi to reprise the role of Palpatine, having assumed that a younger actor would play the role in the prequel films.

Ahmed Best as Jar Jar Binks, a clumsy Gungan exiled from his home and taken in by Qui-Gon and Obi-Wan.
Best was hired after casting director Robin Gurland saw him on a Stomp performance in San Francisco.
Best was originally intended to provide motion capture data, but his offer to voice the character was accepted.
On the set, to provide references for the actors, Best was clothed in a suit made of foam and latex and a headpiece.
Best's filmed performance was later replaced with the computer-generated character.
Best frequently improvised movements to make Jar Jar look as clumsy and comedic as possible.

Anthony Daniels as the voice of C-3PO, a protocol droid built by Anakin.
He lacks a metal covering in this film; R2-D2 humorously refers to it as being "naked".
A puppeteer dressed in a color closely matching the background—in a manner similar to the Japanese puppet theater Bunraku—manipulated a skeletal C-3PO figure attached to his front while Daniels read his lines off-camera.
The puppeteer was erased from the film during post-production.

Kenny Baker as R2-D2, an astromech droid from Naboo that saves Queen Amidala's ship when other astro droids fail.
Before the film's production started, fans campaigned on the Internet to retain Baker as R2-D2; Lucas replied that the actor would reprise the role.
Baker is used for scenes where R2-D2 bends forwards and backwards and wobbles from side-to-side.
Robots and a digital model were used in other shots.

Pernilla August as Shmi Skywalker, Anakin's mother, who is concerned for her son's future and allows him to leave with the Jedi.
August, a veteran of Swedish cinema, was chosen after auditioning with Liam Neeson.
She was afraid of being rejected because of her accent.

Frank Oz as the voice of Yoda, the centuries-old Jedi Grandmaster and head of the Jedi Council who is apprehensive about allowing Anakin to be trained.
Yoda was mostly portrayed as a puppet designed by Nick Dudman based on Stuart Freeborn's original design.
Oz controlled the puppet's mouth, and other parts were controlled by puppeteers using remote controls.
Lucas fitted Yoda's filming around Oz's schedule as he finished and promoted In & Out.
A computer-generated Yoda is featured in two distant shots.
Warwick Davis (who played the part of the Ewok Wicket W. Warrick in Return of the Jedi in 1983) portrays him in the scene where Obi-Wan becomes a Jedi Knight.
Lucas said he originally wanted to use a full-time digital Yoda, but the attempts did not work well enough at the time.
Beginning with the 2011 Blu-ray release of The Phantom Menace, which was also used for the 3D reissue, a CG Yoda replaced the puppet entirely.

Oliver Ford Davies as Sio Bibble, the governor of Naboo.

Hugh Quarshie as Captain Quarsh Panaka, Queen Amidala's chief of security at the Theed Palace.

Samuel L. Jackson as Mace Windu, a Jedi Master and high-ranking member of the Jedi Council who opposes training Anakin.

Ray Park as Darth Maul, Darth Sidious' Zabrak Sith apprentice, who wields a double-bladed lightsaber.

Peter Serafinowicz as the voice of Darth Maul
Terence Stamp as Chancellor Finis Valorum, the Supreme Chancellor of the Galactic Republic who commissions Obi-Wan and Qui-Gon to negotiate with the Trade Federation viceroy.
Lucas described the character as a "good man
but he's beleaguered—a bit like [Bill] Clinton".

Keira Knightley as Sabé, one of Queen Amidala's handmaidens who serves as her decoy throughout the majority of the film.

Silas Carson as:
Nute Gunray, the viceroy of the Trade Federation who leads Naboo's invasion and tries to force Queen Amidala to sign a treaty to legitimize their occupation of the planet.

Ki-Adi-Mundi, a wise and powerful Jedi Master who sits on the Council.

Lott Dod, a Trade Federation Senator.

An ill-fated pilot.
This was the role for which Carson originally auditioned.

Jerome St. John Blake as:
Rune Haako, Gunray's chief lieutenant and Settlement Officer in the Trade Federation.

James Taylor as the voice of Rune Haako.

Oppo Rancisis, a Jedi Master and member of the Council.

Orn Free Ta, a Twi-lek senator.

Mas Amedda, a Chagrian politician and Vice Chair of the galactic senate.
Additionally, Brian Blessed, Andy Secombe, and Lewis MacLeod
voiced Boss Nass, the leader of the Gungan tribe who allies with the Naboo surface dwellers, Watto, a junk dealer on Tatooine who owns Anakin and his mother as slaves, and Sebulba, an aggressive, scheming podracer who is Anakin's main rival at the Boonta Eve podrace, respectively.
Greg Proops and Scott Capurro voiced Fode and Beed, respectively, the two-headed announcer of the Boonta Eve Race.
Alan Ruscoe appears as Jedi Master Plo Koon and Neimoidian Daultay Dofine, commander of the Trade Federation's droid control ships.
Ralph Brown plays Ric Olie, commander of the Naboo Royal Space Fighter Corps and chief pilot aboard Queen Amidala's starship, Matthew Wood appears as the Twi'lek Bib Fortuna, alongside a CGI Jabba the Hutt who is voiced by an uncredited actor.
Dominic West plays the role of an unnamed Naboo guard, and Sofia Coppola appears as Saché, one of Amidala's handmaidens.
Christian Simpson appears as Lieutenant Gavyn Sykes.
Lindsay Duncan voices
TC-14, a protocol droid on the Federation ship.
Sally Hawkins made her screen debut as an uncredited villager.

==
Production ==


===
Development ===
While writing the original Star Wars film, Lucas decided the story was too vast to be covered in one film.
He introduced a wider story arc that could be told in sequels if it became successful.
He negotiated a contract that allowed him to make two sequels, and over time created an elaborate backstory to aid his writing process.
While writing the second film, The Empire Strikes Back, Lucas considered directions in which to take the story.
In the original trilogy, Darth Vader was revealed to have been Anakin Skywalker, a once-powerful Jedi Knight, and a traitor to the Jedi Order.
With this backstory in place, Lucas decided that the movies would work best as a trilogy.
In the trilogy's final episode, Return of the Jedi, Vader is redeemed through an act of sacrifice for Luke.
Throughout the 1980s, Lucas said he had no desire to return to Star Wars and had canceled his sequel trilogy by the time of Return of the Jedi.
However, because Lucas had developed most of the backstory, the idea of prequels continued to fascinate him.
In the early 1990s, Star Wars saw a resurgence in popularity in the wake of Dark Horse's comic line and Timothy Zahn's trilogy of novels.
Lucas saw that there was still a large audience for his idea of a prequel trilogy, and with the development of special effects generated with computer-generated imagery (CGI), Lucas considered returning to his saga and directing the film.
In 1993, it was announced in Variety and other sources that he would be making the prequels.
Lucas began outlining the story; Anakin Skywalker rather than Obi-Wan Kenobi would be the protagonist, and the series would be a tragedy examining Darth Vader's origins.
A relic of the original outline was that Anakin would, like his son, grow up on Tatooine.
Lucas also began to change the prequels' timeline relative to the original series; instead of filling in the tangential history, they would form the beginning of a long story that started with Anakin's childhood and ended with his death.
This was the final step toward turning the franchise into a saga.
Lucas began writing the Star Wars prequel trilogy on November 1, 1994.
The screenplay of Star Wars was adapted from Lucas' 15-page outline that was written in 1976, which he designed to help him keep track of the characters' backstories and events that occurred before the original trilogy.
Anakin was first written as a twelve-year-old, but Lucas reduced his age to nine because he felt that the lower age would better fit the plot point of Anakin being affected by his mother's separation from him.
Eventually, Anakin's younger age led Lucas to rewrite his participation in the movie's major scenes.
The film's working title was The Beginning; Lucas later revealed that its true title was The Phantom Menace; a reference to Palpatine hiding his true identity as an evil Sith Lord behind the facade of a well-intentioned public servant.
The larger budget and possibilities opened up by the use of digital effects made Lucas "think about a much grander, more epic scale—"which
is what I wanted Star Wars to be".
The story ended with five simultaneous, ongoing plots, one leading to another.
The central plot is Palpatine's intent to become Chancellor, which leads to the Trade Federation's attack on Naboo, the Jedi being sent there, Anakin being met along the way, and the rise of the Sith Lords.
As with the original trilogy, Lucas intended The Phantom Menace to illustrate several themes throughout the narrative.
Duality is a frequent theme; Amidala is a queen who passes as a handmaiden, Palpatine plays on both sides of the war, among others.
"
Balance" is frequently suggested; Anakin is supposedly "the one" chosen to bring balance to the Force—Lucas said, "Anakin needed to have a mother, Obi-Wan needed a Master, Darth Sidious needed an apprentice" as without interaction and dialogue, "you wouldn't have
drama".
In November 2015, Ron Howard confirmed that he, Robert Zemeckis, and Steven Spielberg were approached by Lucas to direct The Phantom Menace.
All three approached directors told Lucas that he should direct the film, as they each found the project "too daunting."
===
Pre-production and design ==
=
Before Lucas had started writing, his producing partner Rick McCallum was preparing for the film.
McCallum stated that his experience with The Young Indiana Jones Chronicles led to many of his decisions on The Phantom Menace, such as long-term deals with actors and soundstages, the employment of recent graduates with no film experience, and the creation of sets and landscapes with digital technology.
In April 1994, McCallum started searching for artists in art, architecture and design schools, and in mid-year he began location scouting with production designer Gavin Bocquet.
Industrial Light & Magic (ILM)
art director Doug Chiang impressed McCallum the most and was hired as the design director.
Art development on the film began in January 1995.Within three to four months of Lucas beginning the writing process, Chiang and his design team started a two-year process of reviewing thousands of designs for the film.
Chiang stated that Lucas intended Episode I to be stylistically different from the other Star Wars films; it would be "richer and more like a period piece, since it was the history leading up to A New Hope."
The story takes place on three planets, some with varied environments such as the human and Gungan cities of Naboo and three buildings in Coruscant.
With the exception of the Gungan city, which had an art nouveau-inspired visual, these locations would be given distinctive looks with some basis in the real world.
The concept drawings of Ralph McQuarrie for the original trilogy served as the basis for Mos Espa—which was also inspired by old Tunisian hotels and buildings and had touches such as a market place to differentiate it from A New Hope's Mos Eisley—and Coruscant, in particular a metropolis design that became the basis for the Senate.
Bocquet would later develop the work of Chiang's team and design the interiors, translating the concepts into construction blueprints with environments and architectural styles that had some basis in reality "to give the audience something to key into.
"
Some elements were directly inspired by the original trilogy; Lucas described the battle droids as predecessors to the stormtroopers.
Chiang uses that orientation to base the droids on the Imperial soldiers, only in the same style of stylized and elongated features seen in tribal African art.
Terryl Whitlatch, who had a background on zoology and anatomy, was in charge of creature design.
Many of the aliens are hybrids, combining features of real animals.
At times, entire food chains were developed, even though only a small percentage of them would appear in the film.
Whitlatch also designed detailed skeletons for the major characters and facial muscles on Jar Jar Binks as a reference for ILM's animators.
Each creature would reflect its environment; those on Naboo were more beautiful because the planet is "lush and more animal-friendly", Tatooine has rough-looking creatures "with weather-beaten leathery skin to protect them from the harsh desert elements", and Coruscant has bipedal, human-looking aliens.
The film made extensive use of the new technique of digital pre-visualization, using computers to essentially create 3-D animated storyboards.

This was done for dozens of scenes in the film but was first and primarily used in the pod race sequence.

Animatic supervisor David Dozoretz, also an ILM alum, worked on this sequence for nearly 3 years, and at one point had a 25 minute version of the race, although the film only included a 9-minute version.

Stunt coordinator Nick Gillard was recruited to create a new Jedi fighting style for the prequel trilogy.
Gillard likened the lightsaber battles to a chess game "with every move being a check".
Because of their short-range weapons, Gillard thought that the Jedi would have had to develop a fighting style that merged every swordfighting style, such as kendo and other kenjutsu styles, with other swinging techniques, such as tennis swings and tree-chopping.
While training Liam Neeson and Ewan McGregor, Gillard wrote a sequence that lasted around 60 seconds and intended to be around five or six sequences per fight.
Lucas later referred to the Jedi as "negotiators" rather than high-casualty soldiers.
The preference of hand-to-hand combat was intended to give a spiritual and intellectual role to the Jedi.
Because Gillard thought that the stunt jumps with the actors and stuntmen dangling from wires did not look realistic, air rams were used to propel them into the air instead.
Lucas decided to make elaborate costumes, because the film's society was more sophisticated than the one depicted in the original trilogy.
Designer Trisha Biggar and her team created over 1,000 costumes that were inspired by various cultures.
Biggar worked closely with concept designer Iain McCaig to create a color palette for the inhabitants of each world:
Tatooine followed A New Hope with sun-bleached sand colors
, Coruscant had grays, browns, and blacks, and Naboo had green and gold for humans while Gungans wore "a leathery look, like their skin".
The Jedi costumes followed the tradition from the original film; Obi-Wan's costume was inspired by the costume that was worn by Guinness.
Lucas said he and Biggar would look at the conceptual art to "translat[e]
all of these designs into cloth and fabric and materials that would actually work and not look silly".
Biggar also consulted Gillard to ensure that the costumes would accommodate action scenes, and consulted the creature department to find which fabrics "wouldn't wear too heavily" on the alien skins.
A huge wardrobe department was set up at Leavesden Film Studios to create over 250 costumes for the main actors and 5,000 for the background ones.
Nute Gunray's Thai accent was chosen after Lucas and McCallum listened to various languages to decide how the Neimoidians would speak.
The character design of Watto was an amalgam of rejected ideas; his expressions were based on video footage of Secombe's voice acting, photographs of animation supervisor Rob Coleman imitating the character, and modeler Steve Alpin saying Watto's lines to a mirror.
Lucas described Sebulba's design as "a spider crossed with an orangutan crossed with a sloth", with a camel-like face, and clothing inspired by medieval armor.

===
Casting ===
After Samuel L. Jackson expressed interest in appearing in a Star Wars film, he was approached by casting director Robin Gurland to play Windu.
Ray Park, a martial arts champion with experience in gymnastics and sword fighting, was originally a member of the stunt crew.
Stunt coordinator Nick Gillard filmed Park to demonstrate his conception of the lightsaber battles.
Lucas and McCallum were so impressed with the test tape that they gave Park the role of Maul.
His voice was considered "too squeaky" and was dubbed over in post-production by Peter Serafinowicz.
Keira Knightley's parents tried to convince her not to audition, but the teenage actress still sought a role since she was a Star Wars fan.
The casting was influenced by Knightley's remarkable similarity to Natalie Portman, with the actress admitting their mothers could not tell each other apart.
Knightley was reported to have "cried every single day" due to finding the wardrobe uncomfortable.
Silas Carson was cast as Nute Gunray because another actor was uncomfortable with the costumes used by the Trade Federation characters, which were hot, exerted a lot of pressure on the bearer, and took about 15 minutes to apply.
Hugh Quarshie considered the part of Panaka as "a good career move" and a production that would be fun to make.
Brian Blessed originally auditioned for the role of Sio Bibble, the Governor of Naboo, for which he was considered "too loud".
Casting director Robin Gurland approached him to play Nass because it was a "bigger than life" character with "a kind of bravado".
Blessed described Nass as a "reluctant hero", and a fun role to play.
Sofia Coppola, daughter of Lucas' long-time friend and creative partner Francis Ford Coppola, considers Lucas as "like an uncle to me".
As she prepared the script for her directorial debut
The Virgin Suicides, Coppola heard Lucas would make a new Star Wars film and asked him if she could accompany him during filming.
Lucas offered Coppola a role in the royal entourage, which she accepted because it "seemed like a good vantage point to watch without getting in the way".
===
Filming ===
Filming began on June 26, 1997, and ended on September 30 of that year, primarily taking place at Leavesden Film Studios in England.
Leavesden was leased for a two and a half year period so the production company could leave the sets intact and return after principal photography had been completed.
The forest scenes on Naboo were filmed at Cassiobury Park in Watford, Hertfordshire.
Pick-ups were shot between August 1998 and February 1999 after Lucas screened a rough cut of the film for friends and colleagues in May 1998.
Most of the action and stunts were filmed by Roger Christian's second unit, which worked alongside the main unit instead of afterwards because of the high number of shots to be completed daily.
The Tunisian desert was again used for the Tatooine scenes; Mos Espa was built outside the city of Tozeur.
On the night following the third day of shooting in Tozeur, an unexpected sandstorm destroyed many of the sets and props.
The production was quickly rescheduled to allow for repairs and was able to leave Tunisia on the date originally planned.
The Italian Caserta Palace was used as the interior of the Theed City Naboo Palace; it was used as a location for four days after it had been closed to visitors.
Scenes with explosions were filmed on replica sets in Leavesden.

A binder with the film's storyboards served as a reference for live-action filming, shots that would be filmed in front of a chroma key blue screen, and shots that would be composed using CGI.
The sets were often built with the parts that would be required on screen; often they were built only up to the heights of the actors.
Chroma key was extensively used for digital set extensions, backgrounds, or scenes that required cinematographer David Tattersall to seek powerful lamps to light the sets and visual effects supervisor John Knoll to develop software that would remove the blue reflection from shiny floors.
Knoll, who remained on set through most of the production, worked closely with Tatterstall to ensure that the shots were suitable to add effects later.
The cameras were fitted with data capture models to provide technical data for the CGI artists.
The Phantom Menace was the final Star Wars film to be shot on 35mm film until Episode VII
(Star Wars:
The Force Awakens).
Some scenes, mostly of elements filmed by the special effects team, were shot on high definition, digital video tapes to test the performance of digital recordings, which Lucas and McCallum considered the next logical step because of the amount of digitizing—an expensive process compared to recording directly on digital media—for the compositing of computer-generated effects.
All future films would be shot using Sony CineAlta high-definition video cameras.
Greg Proops and Scott Capurro were filmed wearing makeup and blue bodysuits
so their heads could be joined in a computer-generated body.
The visual effects crew did not like the original results and crafted Fode and Beed as an entirely computer generated alien.
Editing took two years; Paul Martin Smith started the process in England and focused on dialogue-heavy scenes.
Ben Burtt—who was also the film's sound editor—was responsible for action sequences under Lucas' supervision.
Non-linear editing systems played a large part in translating Lucas' vision; he constantly tweaked, revised, and reworked shots and scenes.
The final sound mix was added in March 1999, and the following month, the film was completed after the delivery of the remaining visual effects shots.

=== Effects ===
The film saw breakthrough in computer generated effects.
About 1,950 of the shots in The Phantom Menace have visual effects.
The scene in which toxic gas is released on the Jedi is the only sequence with no digital alteration.
The work was so extensive that three visual effects supervisors divided the workload among themselves—John Knoll supervised the on-set production and the podrace and space battle sequences, Dennis Muren supervised the underwater sequence and the ground battle, and
Scott Squires, alongside teams assigned for miniature effects and character animation, worked on the lightsaber effects.
Until the film's production, many special effects in the film industry were achieved using miniature models, matte paintings, and on-set visual effects—although other films had made extensive use of CGI.
Knoll previewed 3,500 storyboards for the film; Lucas accompanied him to explain factors of the shots that would be practical and those that would be created through visual effects.
Knoll later said that on hearing the explanations of the storyboards, he did not know how to accomplish what he had seen.
The result was a mixture of original techniques and the newest digital techniques to make it difficult for the viewer to guess which technique was being used.
Knoll and his visual effects team wrote new computer software, including cloth simulators to allow a realistic depiction of the digital characters' clothing, to create certain shots.
Another goal was to create computer-generated characters that could act seamlessly with live-action actors.
While filming scenes with CGI characters, Lucas would block the characters using their corresponding voice actors on-set.
The voice actors were then removed and the live-action actors would perform the same scene alone.
A CGI character would later be added into the shot to complete the conversation.
Lucas also used CGI to correct the physical presence of actors in certain scenes.
Practical models were used when their visuals helped with miniature sceneries for backgrounds, set extensions, and model vehicles that would be scanned to create the digital models or filmed to represent spaceships and podraces.
Lucas, who had previously confronted problems with the props used to depict R2-D2, allowed ILM and the production's British special effects department to create their own versions of the robot.
Nine R2-D2 models were created; one was for actor Kenny Baker to be dropped into, seven were built by ILM and featured two wheelchair motors capable of moving 440 pounds (200 kg), enabling it to run and be mostly used in stage sets, and the British studio produced a pneumatic R2-D2 that could shift from two to three legs and was mostly used in Tunisia because its motor drive system allowed it to drive over sand.
Lucas originally planned to create many of the aliens with computer graphics, but those that would be more cost-effectively realized with masks and animatronics were created by Nick Dudman's creature effects team.
These included the Neimodians, background characters in Mos Espa, the Jedi Council, and the Galactic Senate.
Dudman's team was told where the creatures would be required six months before principal photography begun, and they rushed the production.
The Neimodian suits, which were originally intended as digital characters, were delivered one day before they would be required on set.
Dudman traveled to Skywalker Ranch to see the original creatures that could be reused, and read the script for a breakdown of scenes with practical creatures, leaving only the more outlandish designs to be created using CGI.To research for the podrace vehicles, the visual effects crew visited a jet aircraft junkyard outside Phoenix, Arizona and scavenged four Boeing 747 engines.
Life-sized replicas of the engines were built and sent to Tunisia to provide reference in the film.
Except for Jake Lloyd inside a hydraulically controlled cockpit and a few practical podracer models, the entire podracing scene—which the effects crew designed to be as "out of this world" as possible—is computer-generated.
===
Music ===
As with previous Star Wars films, Star Wars Episode I: The Phantom Menace's score was composed and conducted by John Williams.
He started composing the score in October 1998 and began recording the music with the London Voices and London Symphony Orchestra at Abbey Road Studios on February 10, 1999.
Williams decided to use electronic instruments such as synthesizers to enhance the sound and choral pieces to "capture the magical, mystical force that a regular orchestra might not have been able to provide", and create an atmosphere that was "more mysterious and mystical and less military" than those of the original trilogy.
One of the most notable tracks is "Duel of the Fates", which uses the chorus to give a religious, temple-like feel to the epic lightsaber duel.
The track was made into a music video.
While composing Anakin's theme, Williams tried to reflect the innocence of his childhood and to foreshadow his transformation into Darth Vader by using slight suggestions of "The Imperial March" in the melody.
The film's soundtrack was released by Sony Classical Records on May 4, 1999.
This album featured the score, which Williams restructured as a listening experience; it is not presented in film order and omits many notable cues from the film because of the space restriction of the compact disc.
A two-disc "Ultimate Edition" was released on November 14, 2000.
The set features the entire score as it is heard in the film, including all of the edits and loops that were made for the sound mix.

==
Themes ==
Like previous Star Wars films, The Phantom Menace makes several references to historical events and films that George Lucas watched in his youth.
The Star Wars films typically mix several concepts from different mythologies together, drawing heavily from the hero's journey, an archetypical template developed by comparative mythologist Joseph Campbell.
This film also notably borrows from Ben Hur, including the podrace sequence, which mirrors the chariot race scene; additionally, the end celebration scene closely resembles a Roman parade in Ben Hur.

There are many references to Christianity in the film, such as the appearance of Darth Maul, whose design draws heavily from traditional depictions of the devil, complete with red skin and horns.
The Star Wars film cycle features a similar Christian narrative involving Anakin Skywalker; he is the "Chosen One"—the individual prophesied to bring balance to the Force—who was conceived of a virgin birth.
However, unlike Jesus, Anakin will eventually fall from grace and seemingly fail to fulfill his destiny (until the prophecy comes true in Return of the Jedi).Japanese films such as Akira Kurosawa's The Hidden Fortress influenced the original Star Wars film; scholars say that The Phantom Menace was likewise influenced by Korean and Japanese culture.
Film historians Geoff King and Tanya Krzywinska write, "The costume and make-up designs ...
favour a mixture of the gothic and the oriental [sic] over anything very futuristic.
The gothic is most strongly apparent in Darth Maul's demonic horns and the red and black make-up mask that borrows from the facial designs found in depictions of Japanese demons".
King and Krzywinska say that "Qui-Gon's pony tail and Obi-Wan's position of apprentice further encourage a reading in terms of the Samurai tradition".
They also say "Amidala, in keeping with her status and character, has a number of highly formal outfits ... to go with hair sculpted into a curve that frames make-up of a Japanese cast".
The Jedi practice Zen-like meditation and martial arts, as did the ancient Japanese Samurai warriors.
The name "Qui-Gon" adapts the term qigong, which refers to a Chinese discipline involving meditation and cultivation of the flow of the vital energy called "Chi" or "Qi" for healing, health, and combat.
The words Ch'i (Chinese), gi (Korean), ki (Japanese), and the Indian term "Prana" all refer to the energy that is thought to flow through all living things, from the source of all chi (or power), which is "The Way" or "The Tao" in Chinese philosophy.
In Taoist philosophy, from The Way, yin and yang—the opposing but complementary aspects of reality or nature—are born.
Unlike Chinese philosophy, in which yin and yang are not moral qualities, the ancient Persian philosophy of Zurvanism taught that the dualism of dark and light forces are locked in an eternal battle while being two sides (or evolutes) of the same "Force", the force of time itself (Zurvan)—the prime mover.
These elements derive primarily from Eastern and Iranian religions and myths.
As with other Star Wars films, the themes about family and hope are featured prominently.
In the episode "Legacy" of Disney Gallery: The Mandalorian, Dave Filoni explains that the use of "Duel of the Fates" during the lightsaber duel between Darth Maul against Qui-Gon Jinn and Obi-Wan Kenobi represents the fight for the fate of Anakin Skywalker.
According to Filoni, Qui-Gon Jinn acts like a father figure towards Anakin because he feels he needs one after taking him from his mother, having realized that the Jedi shouldn't be opposed to love and care.
In the end, Qui-Gon dies, and thus Anakin loses his father figure; Obi-Wan Kenobi ultimately becomes his master to honor Jinn's dying wish despite his initial contempt for him, and while he comes to eventually see him like a brother as shown in Attack of the Clones and Revenge of the Sith, he doesn't act like a father, which coupled with the Jedi's indifference, seals Anakin's fate.

==
Release ==
The release on May 19, 1999 of the first new Star Wars film in 16 years was accompanied by a considerable amount of attention.
Few film studios released films during the same week: DreamWorks and Universal Studios released The Love Letter on May 21 and Notting Hill on May 28, respectively.
The Love Letter was a commercial failure but Notting Hill fared better and followed The Phantom Menace closely in second place.
Employment consultant firm Challenger, Gray & Christmas estimated that 2.2 million full-time employees missed work to attend the film, resulting in a US$293 million loss of productivity.
According to The Wall Street Journal, so many workers announced plans to view the premiere that many companies closed on the opening day.
Queue areas formed outside cinema theaters over a month before ticket sales began.
More theater lines appeared when it was announced that cinemas were not allowed to sell tickets in advance until two weeks into the release.
This was because of a fear that family theater-goers would be either unable to receive tickets or would be forced to pay higher prices for them.
Instead, tickets were to be sold on a first-come-first-served basis.
However, after meetings with the National Association of Theatre Owners, Lucasfilm agreed to allow advance ticket sales on May 12, 1999, provided there was a limit of 12 tickets per customer.
As a result, some advance tickets were sold by scalpers at prices as high as US$100 apiece, which a distribution chief called "horrible" and said was exactly what they wanted to avoid.
Daily Variety reported that theater owners received strict instructions from Lucasfilm that the film could only play in the cinema's largest auditorium for the first 8–12 weeks, no honor passes were allowed for the first eight weeks, and they were obliged to send their payments to distributor 20th Century Fox within seven days.
Despite worries about the film being finished on time, two weeks before its theatrical release Lucasfilm moved the release date from May 21 to 19, 1999.
At the ShoWest Convention, Lucas said the change was intended to give the fans a "head start" by allowing them to view it during the week and allowing families to view it during weekends.
Foreshadowing his future conversion to digital cinematography, Lucas said the film would be released on four digital projectors on June 18, 1999.
Eleven charity premieres were staged across the United States on May 16, 1999; receipts from the Los Angeles event, where corporate packages were available for between US$5,000 and US$25,000; proceeds were donated to the Elizabeth Glaser Pediatric AIDS Foundation.
Other charity premieres included the Dallas premiere for the Children's Medical Center, the Aubrey Fund for Pediatric Cancer Research at the Sloan-Kettering Hospital in New York, the Big Brother/Sister Association of the Philadelphia premiere, and the Children's National Medical Center in Washington,
D.C. A statement said that tickets were sold at US$500 apiece and that certain sections of the theaters were set aside for disadvantaged children.

===
Marketing ===
Lucasfilm spent US$20 million on the film's advertising campaign and made promotional licensing deals with Hasbro, Lego, Tricon Global Restaurants, and PepsiCo.
Lucasfilm also helped the Star Wars fan club to organize an event called Star Wars Celebration, which was held in Denver, Colorado between April 30 and May 2, 1999.The teaser trailer was released on selected screens accompanying Meet Joe Black on November 13, 1998, and media reported that people were paying full admission at theaters to see the trailer.
To keep fans from leaving before the movie was over, some theaters played the teaser an additional time after the film finished.
A second trailer was released on March 12, 1999, with the film Wing Commander.
Again, many fans paid full theater admission to watch the new trailer.
A bootlegged version of the preview was leaked to the Internet the same day.
The next morning, the trailer was released on the film's official website and shortly afterwards the servers became overloaded.
The theatrical trailer caused even more media attention because it was premiered in theaters and screened at the ShoWest Convention in Las Vegas, and was aired on Entertainment Tonight and Access Hollywood.
The teaser poster, featuring Anakin with his shadow forming Darth Vader's silhouette, was released on November 10, 1998.
After Lucas opted for a drawn theatrical poster, Drew Struzan, the artist responsible for the Special Edition posters, was commissioned to illustrate, and the poster was unveiled on March 11, 1999.
Lucasfilm dictated that, contractually, Struzan's illustration was the only art the foreign distributors could use, and other than the text, it could not be modified in any way.
===
Adaptations ===
A novelization was written by Terry Brooks, who met with Lucas before writing the book and received his approval and guidance.
It includes some scenes that are not in the film and foreshadows pending developments in the following two installments of the series.
Additionally, a Scholastic junior novelization was written by Patricia C. Wrede.
A four-issue comic book adaptation was written by Henry Gilroy and published by Dark Horse Comics.
A LucasArts video game adaptation was released for the PlayStation and PC.
The podracing tie-in Star Wars
Episode
I: Racer was released for Nintendo 64, PC, and other platforms.
A pinball machine was created by WMS Industries.
===
Home media ===
The film was released worldwide on VHS between April 3 and 8, 2000.
Two versions were released in North America on April 4—a standard pan and scan version and a widescreen Collector's Edition version.
In its first two days of availability, the regular version sold 4.5 million copies and the limited edition sold 500,000.
It was the first Star Wars film to be officially released on DVD, on October 16, 2001, in a slightly extended cut from the theatrical release.
The special features included seven deleted scenes completed specifically for the DVD, a commentary track featuring Lucas and producer Rick McCallum, and several documentaries—including a full-length documentary entitled The Beginning:
Making Episode I.
The Phantom Menace became the fastest selling DVD ever in the U.S.; 2.2 million copies were sold in its first week after release.
The DVD version was re-released in a prequel trilogy box set on November 4, 2008.
A LaserDisc version of The Phantom Menace was released in Japan on April 7, 2000, one year and six months before it was available on DVD in the U.S.
The Star Wars films were released by 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment on Blu-ray Disc on September 16, 2011; The Phantom Menace was restored to improve the picture quality and remove the magnification present on the previous DVD release, restoring approximately 8 percent of the picture to the frame.
In the Blu-ray release of The Phantom Menace, the Yoda puppet was replaced with a CGI model, making it consistent with the other films of the prequel trilogy.
On April 7, 2015, Walt Disney Studios, 20th Century Fox, and Lucasfilm jointly announced the digital releases of the six released Star Wars films.
The Phantom Menace was released through the iTunes Store, Amazon Video, Vudu, Google Play, and Disney Movies
Anywhere on April 10, 2015.Walt
Disney Studios Home Entertainment reissued The Phantom Menace on Blu-ray, DVD, and digital download on September 22, 2019.
Additionally, all six films were available for 4K HDR and Dolby Atmos streaming on Disney+ upon the service's launch on November 12, 2019.
This version of the film was released by Disney on 4K Ultra HD Blu-ray box set on March 31, 2020.
===
3D re-release ===
On September 28, 2010, it was announced that all six films in the series would be stereo-converted to 3D.
These would be re-released in episode order, beginning with The Phantom Menace, which was released to cinemas on February 10, 2012.
Prime Focus Limited did the conversion under the supervision of ILM.
However, the 3D re-releases of Episodes II–VI were postponed or canceled after Lucasfilm was bought by The Walt Disney Company, who decided to focus on the development of Star Wars: The Force Awakens.
Lucas stated the 3D re-release was "just a conversion" of the film's 2011 Blu-ray release and no additional changes were made.
Only a change to Anakin's magnetic wand during the podrace scene—its tip was sharpened to more accurately fit the original 2D photography to the new 3D image—was confirmed.
General Mills and Brisk were promotional partners in North America for the 3D re-release but promotion was limited.
The film was extensively promoted in Japan; promotional products were sold by 7-Eleven, Domino's Pizza, Pepsi and Gari-Gari Kun.
Kellogg's promoted the film internationally, and French restaurant Quick launched three Star Wars-themed burgers.
Lucasfilm also partnered with Variety, the Children's Charity to raise funds for children through the sale of a special edition badge.

== Reception ==


===
Critical response ===
On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 53% based on 232 reviews, with an average rating of 5.9/10.
The site's critical consensus reads, "Burdened by exposition and populated with stock characters
, The Phantom Menace gets the Star Wars prequels off to a bumpy – albeit visually dazzling – start."
On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 51 out of 100, based on 36 critics, indicating "mixed or average reviews".
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A–" on an A+ to F scale.
Many aspects of the scripting and characters were criticized, especially that of Jar Jar Binks, who was regarded by many members of the older fan community as toyetic—a merchandising opportunity rather than a serious character.
Kenneth Turan of the Los Angeles Times described Binks as "a major miscue, a comic-relief character who's frankly not funny".
Drew Grant of Salon wrote, "Perhaps the absolute creative freedom director George Lucas enjoyed while dreaming up the flick's 'comic' relief—with no studio execs and not many an independently minded actor involved—is a path to the dark side."

Conversely, Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times gave it three-and-a-half stars out of four and called it "an astonishing achievement in imaginative filmmaking" and said, "Lucas tells a good story."
Ebert also wrote that, "If some of the characters are less than compelling, perhaps that's inevitable" because it is the opening film in the new trilogy.
He concluded his review by saying that rather than Star Trek films, filmmakers could "[g]ive me transparent underwater cities and vast hollow senatorial spheres any day".
Owen Gleiberman of Entertainment Weekly gave the film a "B" grade and complimented Liam Neeson's performance and the action scenes.
In an Entertainment Weekly review for the DVD release, Marc Bernardin gave the film a "C–", calling it "haplessly plotted, horribly written, and juvenile".
ReelViews' James Berardinelli wrote,Looking at the big picture, in spite of all its flaws, The Phantom Menace is still among the best "bang for a buck" fun that can be had in a movie theater.
It isn't as fresh as the original Star Wars, nor does it have the thematic richness and narrative complexity of The Empire Strikes Back, but it is a distinct improvement over Return of the Jedi.
In fact, after Return of the Jedi, I didn't have a burning desire to return to this galaxy 'far, far away', but, with The Phantom Menace, Lucas has revived my interest.
Now, it's with genuine regret that I realize the next segment of the series is three long years away.

Andrew Johnston of Time
Out
New York wrote, "Let's face it: no film could ever match the expectations some have for Episode I – The Phantom Menace.
Which isn't to say it's a disappointment: on the contrary, it's awesomely entertaining, provided you accept it on its own terms ...
Like the original film, it's a Boy's Own adventure yarn with a corny but irresistible spiritual subtext.
The effects and production design are stunning, but they always serve the story, not the other way around."
Susan Wloszczyna of USA
Today said that the film did "plenty right" and praised the characters Darth Maul and Watto.
David Cornelius of efilmcritic.com said that the film's better moments "don't merely balance out the weaker ones—they topple them".
Colin Kennedy of Empire magazine said that despite problems with pacing and writing, "there is still much pleasure to be had watching our full-blown Jedi guides in action".
He praised the visuals and Liam Neeson's performance, and said that the duel between Darth Maul and the Jedi was "the saga's very best lightsaber
battle".
Empire magazine ranked The Phantom Menace on its list of "500 Greatest Movies of All Time", while Entertainment Weekly and Comcast included the film on their lists of the worst movie sequels.
James Berardinelli wrote, "The Phantom Menace was probably the most overhyped motion picture of the last decade (if not longer), and its reputation suffered as a result of its inability to satisfy unreasonable expectations."
William Arnold of the Seattle Post-Intelligencer agreed that the film's massive hype caused many of the negative reactions, saying, "it built expectations that can't possibly be matched and scuttled [the] element of storytelling surprise".
He also said that the film was "well made and entertaining" and was much better than similar box office fare released around that year, such as The Mummy and The Matrix.
The introduction of midi-chlorians—microscopic organisms that mediate use of the Force—has been regarded as controversial.
Some viewed it as a concept that negates the Force's spiritual quality.
Film historian Daniel Dinello says, "Anathema to Star Wars fanatics who thought they reduced the Force to a kind of viral infection, midi-chlorians provide a biological interface, the link between physical bodies and spiritual energy."
Religion expert John D. Caputo writes, "In the 'Gospel according to Lucas', a world is conjured up in which the intractable oppositions that have tormented religious thinkers for centuries are reconciled ...
The gifts that the Jedi masters enjoy have a perfectly plausible scientific basis, even if its ways are mysterious: their bodily cells have a heavier than usual concentration of 'midi-chlorians'.
"There has been some controversy over whether several alien characters reflect racial stereotypes.
For example, the oafish, slow-witted Jar Jar Binks has long droopy ears reminiscent of dreadlocks and spoke with what many perceived as a Caribbean patois reminiscent of Jamaican Creole.
Drew Grant describes the character as "[s]ervile and cowardly ...
a black minstrel-ish stereotype on par with Stepin Fetchit."
Georgetown University professor of African-American studies
Michael Eric Dyson says that the entire Gungan species seems suggestive of a primitive African tribe, with Boss Nass portrayed as "a fat, bumbling ... caricature of a stereotypical African tribal chieftain.
"
The greedy and corrupt Neimoidians of the Trade Federation speak with East Asian accents, and the unprincipled trader Watto has been interpreted as a Jewish stereotype reminiscent of Charles Dickens' character Fagin.
Lucas has denied all of these implications, instead criticizing the American media for using opinions from the Internet as a reliable source for news stories.
Lucas added that it reflects more the racism of the commenters than it does the movie; however, animator Rob Coleman said that he viewed footage of Alec Guinness as Fagin in Oliver Twist to inspire his animators in the creation of Watto.

===
Box office ===
Despite its mixed critical reception, The Phantom Menace was a financial success, breaking many box office records in its debut, and beating out The Mummy by taking number 1.
It broke The Lost World: Jurassic Park's records for the largest single-day gross for taking more than $28 million in the opening day and fastest to gross $100 million in five days.
It grossed $64.8 million in its opening weekend, the second-ever highest at the time.
It also became the quickest film to reach the $200 million and $300 million marks, surpassing Independence Day (1996) and Titanic (1997) respectively.
The Phantom Menace was 1999's most successful film, staying in the Top 10 until August 5 (11 weeks total), earning $431.1 million in the United States and Canada.
Box Office Mojo estimates that the film sold over 84.8 million tickets in the US in its initial theatrical run.
The film set an opening record in Japan, grossing $12.2 million in its first two days from 403 screens.
In the UK, the film also set an opening record with £9.5 million in its opening weekend (including previews).
Outside the United States and Canada, the film grossed over $10 million in Australia ($25.9 million), Brazil ($10.4 million), France and Algeria ($43 million), Germany ($53.9 million), Italy ($12.9 million), Japan ($109.9 million), Mexico ($12 million), Spain ($25 million), and the United Kingdom and Ireland ($81.9 million).
Its overseas total was $493.2 million, taking its worldwide total to $924.3 million.
At that time, the film was the third highest-grossing film in North America behind Titanic and Star Wars (1977), and the second highest-grossing film worldwide behind Titanic without adjusting for inflation of ticket prices.
When adjusted for ticket price inflation, it ranked as the 19th-highest-grossing film domestically, making it the fourth Star Wars film to be in the Inflation-Adjusted Top 20.

After its 3D re-release in 2012, the worldwide box office gross exceeded $1 billion.
Although in the intervening years, the film had lost some of its rankings in the lists of highest-grossing films, the 3D re-release returned it to the worldwide all-time Top 10 for several months.
In North America, its revenues overtook those of the original Star Wars as the saga's highest-grossing film when not adjusting for inflation of ticket prices, and is the tenth highest-grossing film in North America as of August 2017.
In North America, its ranking on the Adjusted for Ticket Price Inflation list climbed to 16th place—one place behind Return of the Jedi.
The 3D re-release, which premiered in February 2012, earned $43 million—$22.5 million of which was in North America—worldwide.
The 3D re-release earned US$102,727,119 worldwide—including $43.5 million in North America—and has increased the film's overall box office takings to $474.5 million domestically, and $552.5 million in other territories.
The film's earnings exceeded $1 billion worldwide on February 22, 2012, making it the first Star Wars film and the 11th film in history—excluding inflation—to do so.
===
Accolades ===
The Phantom Menace was nominated for three Academy Awards: Best Sound Effects Editing, Best Visual Effects, and Best Sound (Gary Rydstrom, Tom Johnson, Shawn Murphy and John Midgley); all of which went to The Matrix.
The film won Saturn Awards for Best Costumes and Best Special Effects, the MTV Movie Award for Best Action Scene, and a Young Artist Award for Jake Lloyd's performance.
It was also nominated for—among others—the BAFTAs for Visual Effects and Sound, and the Grammy Award for Best Score Soundtrack for Visual Media.
The film did however receive seven Golden Raspberry Award (Razzie) nominations for Worst Picture, Worst Director, Worst Screenplay, Worst Supporting Actor (Jake Lloyd as Anakin), Worst Supporting Actress (Sofia Coppola as Saché), Worst Screen Couple (Jake Lloyd and Natalie Portman), and
Jar Jar Binks
actor Ahmed Best won the Worst Supporting Actor category.
The film was nominated Choice Movie: Drama, Choice Movie: Villain and Choice Movie:
Summer at 1999 Teen Choice Awards, but both lost to Cruel Intentions and Big Daddy, respectively.

==
Legacy ==
A month after the film's release, "Weird Al" Yankovic released the parody song and music video "
The Saga Begins", in which he interprets the film's plot from Obi-Wan's point of view to the tune of "American Pie"; this was included as a bonus feature on a 2011 Star Wars Blu-ray.
In a 2018 Saturday Night Live comedy rap video, Natalie Portman reprised her appearance as Queen Amidala from The Phantom Menace and defended the prequel trilogy.
Darth Maul's lightsaber-fighting style served as the inspiration for the 2003 viral video Star Wars Kid.
Maul, who appears to die in The Phantom Menace, was resurrected for the animated series Star Wars: The Clone Wars, and also appears in Star Wars Rebels and Solo:
A Star Wars Story.
In 2012, IGN named Maul the 16th greatest Star Wars character.
A similar weapon to his dual-bladed lightsaber appears in Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker.

==
Sequels ==
A sequel, Attack of the Clones, was released in 2002.
The story continues a decade later with Anakin grown to adulthood, played by Hayden Christensen.
A second sequel, Revenge of the Sith, was released in 2005.

== See also ==
List of films featuring space stations
List of films featuring extraterrestrials
List of Star Wars films


==
References ==
Footnotes
Citations


===
Sources ===


==
Further reading ==


==
External links ==
Official website at StarWars.com
Official website at Lucasfilm.com
Star Wars:
Episode
I
The Phantom Menace on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace at IMDb
Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace at AllMovie
Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace at Rotten Tomatoes
Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace at Metacritic
Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace at Box Office Mojo
Star Wars
Episode
I:
The Phantom Menace at The Numbers
Star Wars
Episode
I:
The Phantom Menace at Corona's Coming Attractions
Star Wars:
Episode II – Attack of the Clones is a 2002 American epic space-opera film directed by George Lucas and written by Lucas and Jonathan Hales.
It is the second installment of the Star Wars prequel trilogy, the fifth Star Wars film to be produced, and the second episode in the "Skywalker saga.
"
The film stars Ewan McGregor, Natalie Portman, Hayden Christensen, Ian McDiarmid, Samuel L. Jackson, Christopher Lee, Anthony Daniels, Kenny Baker, and Frank Oz.
The story is set ten years after The Phantom Menace, as thousands of planetary systems slowly secede from the Galactic Republic and join the newly-formed Confederacy of Independent Systems, led by former Jedi Master Count Dooku.
With the galaxy on the brink of civil war, Obi-Wan Kenobi investigates a mysterious assassination attempt on Senator Padmé Amidala, which leads him to uncover a clone army in service of the Republic and the truth behind the Separatist movement.
Meanwhile, his apprentice Anakin Skywalker is assigned to protect Amidala and develops a secret relationship with her.
Soon, the trio witness the onset of a new threat to the galaxy: the Clone Wars.

Development of Attack of the Clones began in March 2000, some months after the release of The Phantom Menace.
By June 2000, Lucas and Hales completed a draft of the script, and principal photography took place from June to September 2000.
The film crew primarily shot at Fox Studios Australia in Sydney, Australia, with additional footage filmed in Tunisia, Spain, and Italy.
It was one of the first motion pictures shot completely on a high-definition digital 24-frame system.

The film was released in the United States on May 16, 2002.
It received mixed reviews, with some critics hailing it as an improvement over its predecessor The Phantom Menace and others considering it the worst installment of the franchise.
The film was praised for an increased emphasis on action, visual effects, musical score, and costume design, but criticized for the screenplay, Christensen's performance, romantic scenes, and underdeveloped characters.
It performed well in the box office, making over $653 million worldwide; however, it also became the first Star Wars film to be outgrossed in its year of release, placing third domestically and fourth-highest-grossing worldwide.
The third and final film of the prequel trilogy, Revenge of the Sith, was released in 2005.

==
Plot ==
Ten years after the battle at Naboo, the Galactic Republic is threatened by a Separatist movement organized by former Jedi Master Count Dooku.
Senator Padmé Amidala comes to Coruscant to vote on a motion to create an army to assist the Jedi against the threat.
Narrowly avoiding an assassination attempt upon her arrival, she is placed under the protection of Jedi Master Obi-Wan Kenobi and his apprentice Anakin Skywalker.
The pair thwart a second attempt on Padmé's life and subdue the assassin, Zam Wesell, who is killed by her employer, a bounty hunter, before she can reveal his identity.
The Jedi Council instructs Obi-Wan to find the bounty hunter, while Anakin is tasked to protect Padmé and escort her back to Naboo, where the two fall in love in spite of the Jedi Code that forbids relationships.

Obi-Wan's search leads him to the mysterious ocean planet of Kamino, where he discovers an army of clones being produced for the Republic in a deceased Jedi's name, with bounty hunter Jango Fett serving as their genetic template.
Obi-Wan deduces Jango to be the bounty hunter he is seeking, and after a brief battle, places a homing beacon on Jango's ship,
Slave I. He then follows Jango and his clone son, Boba, to the planet Geonosis.
Meanwhile, Anakin is troubled by visions of his mother, Shmi, in pain and decides to return to his homeworld of Tatooine with Padmé to save her.
Watto reveals that he sold Shmi to moisture farmer Cliegg Lars, who then freed and married her.
Cliegg tells Anakin that she was abducted by Tusken Raiders weeks earlier and is likely dead.
Determined to find his mother, Anakin ventures out and finds her at the Tusken campsite, still barely alive.
After she dies in his arms, an enraged Anakin massacres the tribe.
He later declares to Padmé that he will find a way to prevent the deaths of those he loves.

On Geonosis, Obi-Wan discovers a Separatist gathering led by Count Dooku, who is developing a droid army with Trade Federation Viceroy Nute Gunray and ordered the attempts on Padmé's life.
Obi-Wan transmits his findings to the Jedi Council but is captured by Separatist droids.
Dooku meets Obi-Wan in his cell and explains his role in the Confederacy of Independent Systems' formation, while implying that a large portion of the Galactic Senate is under the control of his new master, Darth Sidious.
He then invites Obi-Wan to join him and stop the Dark Lord of the Sith.
When Obi-Wan refuses, Dooku claims that Obi-Wan's late master and Dooku's former apprentice Qui-Gon Jinn would have, had he been alive.
Meanwhile, Senate Representative Jar Jar Binks proposes a successful vote to grant emergency powers to Chancellor Palpatine, allowing the clone army to be authorized.

Anakin and Padmé head to Geonosis to rescue Obi-Wan, but Anakin loses his lightsaber
and they are captured by Jango.
Dooku sentences the trio to death, but they are saved by a battalion of clone troopers led by Yoda, Mace Windu, and other Jedi.
Windu beheads Jango during the ensuing battle.
Obi-Wan and Anakin intercept Dooku, and they engage in a lightsaber duel.
Dooku injures Obi-Wan and severs Anakin's right arm, but Yoda intercepts and defends them.
Dooku uses the Force to distract Yoda and escapes to Coruscant, where he delivers the plans of a super-weapon to Sidious.
The Council is left disturbed by Dooku's claim of Sidious controlling the Senate.
As the Jedi acknowledge the beginning of the Clone Wars, Anakin is fitted with a robotic hand and marries Padmé on Naboo, with C-3PO and R2-D2 as the only witnesses.

== Cast ==
Ewan McGregor as Obi-Wan Kenobi: A Jedi Knight and mentor to his Padawan learner, Anakin Skywalker, who investigates the assassination attempt of Padmé, leading him to discover the production of a Clone Army for the Galactic Republic.
In the 10 years since The Phantom Menace, he has grown wiser and more powerful in the use of the Force.

Natalie Portman as Senator Padmé Amidala: Former Queen of Naboo, who has recently been elected the planet's Senator, and Anakin's love interest.

Hayden Christensen as Anakin Skywalker:
A former slave from Tatooine and Obi-Wan's gifted Padawan apprentice who is assigned to protect Padmé with whom he falls in love.
He is believed to be the "chosen one" of Jedi prophecy destined "to bring balance to The Force."
In the 10 years since The Phantom Menace, he has grown powerful but arrogant, and believes that Obi-Wan is holding him back.
A large search for an actor to portray Anakin Skywalker was performed.
Lucas auditioned various actors, mostly unknown, before casting Christensen.
Among the many established actors who auditioned were Jonathan Brandis, Ryan Phillippe, Colin Hanks, and Paul Walker.
Leonardo DiCaprio also met with Lucas for the role, but was "definitely unavailable" according to DiCaprio publicist Ken Sunshine.
Co-star Natalie Portman later told Time magazine that Christensen "gave a great reading.
He could simultaneously be scary and really young."

Christopher Lee as Count Dooku / Darth Tyranus: A former Jedi Master and the old mentor of Obi-Wan's late master Qui-Gon Jinn, who is now the puppet leader of the Separatist movement as Sidious' new Sith apprentice and a suspect in Obi-Wan's investigation.

Samuel L. Jackson as Mace Windu:
A Jedi Master sitting on the Jedi Council who warily watches the Galactic Senate's politics.

Frank Oz as the voice of Yoda:
The centuries-old Jedi Grandmaster of an unknown alien species.
In addition to leading the Jedi Council, Yoda is the instructor for the young Jedi padawans.

Ian McDiarmid as Supreme Chancellor Palpatine / Darth Sidious: A former Galactic Senator from Naboo and secret Sith Lord, who amasses vast emergency powers as the Chancellor of the Galactic Republic upon the outbreak of the Clone Wars.

Pernilla August as Shmi Skywalker:
Anakin's mother and a former slave.

Temuera Morrison as Jango Fett: A bounty hunter who gave his DNA for use by the cloning facilities on Kamino for the creation of the clone army.
In addition to his wage, he requested an unaltered clone for himself to take as his son – Boba Fett.

Anthony Daniels as C-3PO: A protocol droid built by Anakin as a child who now serves the Lars family.
He later leaves Tatooine to accompany Anakin and Padmé.
Daniels also makes a cameo appearance as Dannl Faytonni:
An attendee of the Coruscant Outlander Club who witnesses Anakin and Obi-Wan capturing Zam WesellKenny Baker as R2-D2: Anakin's astromech droid who often accompanies him and Obi-Wan on missions.

Daniel Logan as Boba Fett: Jango Fett's clone and adopted son.

Leeanna Walsman as Zam Wesell : A bounty hunter and partner of Jango Fett, who is given the task of assassinating Padmé.
Although her appearance is human, she is actually a Clawdite, who can shapeshift.

Silas Carson as Nute Gunray and Ki-Adi-Mundi:
Gunray is the Nemoidian Viceroy of the Trade Federation and one of the leaders of the Separatist movement, who puts a hit on Padmé as revenge for his loss against her people on Naboo in The Phantom Menace.
Mundi is a Cerean Jedi Master sitting on the Jedi Council.

Ahmed Best as Delegate Jar Jar Binks: Padmé's loyal Gungan friend whom she appoints Representative of Naboo in the Galactic Senate.
Best also makes a cameo appearance as Achk Med-Beq:
An attendee of the Coruscant Outlander Club who witnesses Anakin and Obi-Wan capturing Zam WesellJimmy Smits as Bail Organa : A senator from Alderaan.

Jay Laga'aia as Gregar Typho :
Padmé's newly appointed captain of security.

Oliver Ford Davies as Sio Bibble: Governor of Naboo.

Rose Byrne as Dormé: Handmaiden of Padmé.

Jack Thompson as Cliegg Lars: Shmi's husband, Owen's father and Anakin's stepfather.

Joel Edgerton as Owen Lars : Cliegg's son and Anakin's stepbrother.

Bonnie Piesse as Beru Whitesun : Owen's girlfriend.

Andy Secombe as Watto:
Anakin and Shmi's former slave owner.

Ronald Falk as Dexter Jettster :
Obi-Wan's Besalisk friend who runs a diner on Coruscant and informs him about Kamino.

Alethea McGrath as Jocasta Nu, the librarian at the Jedi Temple who helps Obi-Wan gain information about Kamino.
E!
reported that Lucas had asked NSYNC to film a small background cameo appearance, in order to satisfy his daughters.
They were subsequently cut out of the film in post-production.
The end credits erroneously list Alan Ruscoe as playing Neimoidian senator Lott Dod.
The character was actually another Neimoidian, played by an uncredited David Healey and voiced by Christopher Truswell.
Liam Neeson reprised his role as Qui-Gon Jinn from The Phantom Menace, who only appears as a disembodied voice heard by Anakin while slaughtering the Tusken Raiders.

==
Production
==
===
Writing ===
After the mixed critical response to The Phantom Menace, Lucas was hesitant to return to the writing desk.
In March 2000, just three months before the start of principal photography, Lucas finally completed his rough draft for Episode II.
Lucas continued to iterate on his rough draft, producing a proper first and second draft.
For help with the third draft, which would later become the shooting script, Lucas brought on Jonathan Hales, who had written several episodes of The Young Indiana Jones Chronicles for him, but had limited experience writing theatrical films.
The final script was completed just one week before the start of principal photography.

As an in-joke, the film's working title was Jar Jar's Great Adventure, a sarcastic reference to the negative fan response to the Episode I character.
In writing The Empire Strikes Back, Lucas initially decided that Lando Calrissian was a clone and came from a planet of clones which caused the "Clone Wars" mentioned by Obi-Wan Kenobi in A New Hope; he later came up with an alternate concept of an army of clone shocktroopers from a remote planet which were used by the Republic as an army in the war that followed.

===
Filming ===
Principal photography occurred between June 26, 2000 and September 20, 2000 at Fox Studios Australia in Sydney.
Location shooting took place in the Tunisian desert, at the Plaza de España in Seville, London, China, Vancouver, San Diego, and Italy (Villa del Balbianello on Lake Como, and in the former royal Palace of Caserta).
At his own personal request, Samuel L. Jackson's character Mace Windu received a lightsaber that emits a purple glow, as opposed to traditional blue and green for "good guys" and red for "bad guys".
Reshoots were performed in March 2001.
During this time, a new action sequence was developed featuring the droid factory after Lucas had decided that the film lacked a quick enough pace in the corresponding time-frame.
The sequence's previsualization was rushed, and the live-action footage was shot within four and a half hours.
Because of Lucas' method of creating shots through various departments and sources that are sometimes miles and years apart from each other, Attack of the Clones became the first film ever to be produced through what Rick McCallum called "virtual filmmaking".
Like The Phantom Menace, Attack of the Clones furthered technological development, effectively moving Hollywood into the "digital age" with the use of the HDW-F900, developed by Sony and Panavision, a digital camera using an HD digital 24-frame system.
This spawned controversy over the benefits and disadvantages of digital cinematography that continues as more filmmakers "convert" to digital filmmaking while many filmmakers oppose it.
In contrast to previous installments, for which scenes were shot in the Tunisian desert in temperatures up to 125 °F (51 °C), the camera would still run without complications.
Lucas had stated that he wished to film The Phantom Menace on this format but Sony was unable to build the cameras quickly enough.
In 2002, Attack of the Clones became the third film to be released that was shot entirely on a 24p digital camera (preceded by 2001's Jackpot and Vidocq).
The cameras record in the 16:9 HDCAM format (1080p), although the image was cropped to a 2.40:1 widescreen ratio.
The area above and below the 2.40 extraction area was available for Lucas to reframe the picture as necessary in post-production.

Despite Lucas' efforts to persuade movie theaters to switch to digital projectors for viewing of Episode II, few theaters did.

===
Visual effects ===
The film relied almost solely on digital animatics as opposed to storyboards in order to previsualize sequences for editing early on in the film's production.
While Lucas had used other ways of producing motion-based storyboards in the past, after The Phantom Menace the decision was made to take advantage of the growing digital technology.
The process began with Ben Burtt's creation of what the department dubbed as "videomatics", so called because they were shot on a household videocamera.
In these videomatics, production assistants and relatives of the department workers acted out scenes in front of greenscreen.
Using computer-generated imagery (CGI), the previsualization department later filled in the green screen with rough background footage.
Burtt then cut together this footage and sent it off to Lucas for changes and approval.
The result was a rough example of what the final product was intended to be.
The previsualization department then created a finer version of the videomatic by creating an animatic, in which the videomatic actors, props, and sets were replaced by digital counterparts to give a more precise, but still rough, look at what would eventually be seen.
The animatic was later brought on set and shown to the actors so that they could understand the concept of the scene they were filming in the midst of the large amount of bluescreen used.
Unlike most of the action sequences, the Battle of Geonosis was not story-boarded or created through videomatics but was sent straight to animatics after the department received a small vague page on the sequence.
The intent was to create a number of small events that would be edited together for pacing inside the finished film.
The animatics department was given a free hand regarding events to be created within the animatic; Lucas only asked for good action shots that he could choose from and approve later.

In addition to introducing the digital camera, Attack of the Clones emphasized "digital doubles" as computer-generated models that doubled for actors, in the same way that traditional stunt doubles did.
It also furthered the authenticity of computer-generated characters by introducing a new, completely CGI-created version of the character Yoda.
Rob Coleman and John Knoll prepared two tests featuring a CGI-animated Yoda using audio from The Empire Strikes Back.
Yoda's appearance in Episode V also served as the reference point for the creation of the CGI Yoda; Lucas repeatedly stated to the animation department that "the trick" to the animation of the CGI Yoda was to make him like the puppet from which he was based, in order to maintain a flow of continuity.
Frank Oz (voice and puppeteer for Yoda in the original trilogy and The Phantom Menace) was consulted; his main piece of advice was that Yoda should look extremely old, sore, and frigid.
Coleman later explained the process of making the digital Yoda like the puppet version, by saying "When Frank [Oz] would move the head, the ears would jiggle.
If we hadn't put that in, it wouldn't look like Yoda."
Because of the acrobatics of the lightsaber fight between Count Dooku and Yoda, the then 78-year-old Christopher Lee relied on a stunt double to perform the most demanding scenes instead.
Lee's face was superimposed onto the double's body in all shots other than close-ups, which he performed himself.
Lucas often called the duel crucial to the animation department, as it had such potential to be humorous rather than dramatic.

===
Music ===
The soundtrack to the film was released on April 23, 2002 by Sony Classical Records.
The music was composed and conducted by John Williams, and performed by the London Voices and London Symphony Orchestra.
The soundtrack recreates "The Imperial March" from the film The Empire Strikes Back for its first chronological appearance in Attack of the Clones, even though a hint of it appeared in the previous movie in one of the final scenes.
A music video for the main theme "Across the Stars" was produced specifically for the DVD.On March 15, 2016, a limited edition vinyl version of the soundtrack was released.
Only 1,000 copies were pressed initially.

==
Themes ==
Lucas has noted that Palpatine's rise to power is very similar to that of Adolf Hitler in Nazi Germany; as Chancellor of Germany, the latter was granted emergency powers, as is Palpatine.
Comparisons have been made to Octavian—who became Augustus, the first emperor of Rome—and to Napoleon Bonaparte, who rose to power in France from 1796 to 1799.
Octavian was responsible for the deaths of hundreds of political opponents well before he was granted tribunician powers; Bonaparte was appointed First Consul for life (and later Emperor) by the French Consulate after a failed attempt on his life and the subsequent coup of 18 Brumaire in 1799.
References to the American Civil War can also be discerned.
War journalism, combat films, and footage of World War II combat influenced the documentary-style camera work of the Battle of Geonosis, even to the point that hand-held shakes were digitally added to computer-generated sequences.
English scholar Anne Lancashire describes Attack of the Clones as "thoroughly political in its narrative", to the point that interpersonal relations are made subordinate to the political drama that unfolds, and "a critique of the increasing role played by economic and political appetite in contemporary First World international politics in general".
In this political drama, the Trade Federation, the former idealist Dooku, and Palpatine "[represent] the economic and political greed and ambition ... of the political and business classes", while the intuition of the Jedi has been clouded by the dark side of the Force.
The cityscape of Coruscant, the location of the Jedi Temple, is a dystopian environment that refers to 1982's Blade Runner.
Nevertheless, the Jedi endure as the heroes; Obi-Wan's role has been noted as similar to that of James Bond, and Zam Wesell's attempt on Padmé's life is similar to a scene in the first 007 film,
Dr. No.
The prequel trilogy films often refer to the original trilogy in order to help connect the films together.
Lucas has often referred to the films as a long poem that rhymes.
Such examples include the line "I have a bad feeling about this", a phrase used in each film, and lightsaber duels which almost always occur over a pit.
As with Attack of the Clones, The Empire Strikes Back was the middle film in a trilogy, and of the original trilogy films, The Empire Strikes Back is the object of the most references in Attack of the Clones.
In both films, an asteroid field is the backdrop of a major star battle in the middle of the film.
Obi-Wan escapes Jango Fett by attaching his spacecraft to an asteroid in order to disappear from the enemy sensors; Han Solo uses a similar tactic by attaching the Millennium Falcon to a Star Destroyer in The Empire Strikes Back.
As a retcon, John Knoll confirms on the film's DVD commentary that Boba Fett, who would later catch Solo in the act in The Empire Strikes Back, "learned his lesson" from the events of Attack of the Clones.

==
Release ==
After a teaser trailer premiered with the film Monsters, Inc., a new trailer for the film aired on the Fox Network on March 10, 2002 between Malcolm in the Middle and The X-Files, then on March 15, 2002 with Ice Age in theatres and was made available on the official Star Wars web site the same day.
The outplacement firm Challenger, Gray & Christmas from Chicago predicted before the film's release that U.S. companies could lose more than $319 million in productivity due to employees calling in sick and then heading to theaters to see the film.
The film premiered as part of the inaugural Tribeca Film Festival at the BMCC Performing Arts Center, 199 Chambers St. in New York City at a Sunday, May 12 set of screenings benefitting the Children's Aid Society, a charity supported by George Lucas.
Attack of the Clones was then screened out of competition at the 2002 Cannes Film Festival, before getting a worldwide theatrical release on May 16, 2002.
The film was also later released in IMAX theaters; the film had not been filmed for IMAX but was "up converted" with the digital remastering process.
Because of the technical limitations of the IMAX projector at the time, an edited, 120-minute version of the film was presented.
Before the film's release, there was a string of controversies regarding copyright infringement.
In 2000, an underground organization calling itself the Atlas Group, based in Perth, Western Australia offered a copy of the screenplay, with an asking price of US$100,000, to various fan sites and media organizations, including TheForce.
Net.
The scheme was subsequently reported to Lucasfilm Ltd. by the fan site.

An unauthorized copy was allegedly made at a private showing, using a digital recorder that was pointed at the screen.
This copy spread over the internet, and analysts predicted up to a million fans would have seen the film before the day of its release.
In addition, authorities seized thousands of bootlegs throughout Kuala Lumpur before the film opened.
===
Home media ===
Attack of the Clones was released on DVD and VHS on November 12, 2002.
The DVD features an audio commentary from director George Lucas, producer Rick McCallum, editor and sound designer Ben Burtt, ILM animation director Rob Coleman, and ILM visual effects supervisors Pablo Helman, John Knoll, and Ben Snow.
Eight deleted scenes are included along with multiple documentaries, which include a full-length documentary about the creation of digital characters and two others that focus on sound design and the animatics team.
Three featurettes examine the storyline, action scenes, and love story, and a set of 12 short web documentaries cover the overall production of the film.
The Attack of the Clones DVD also features a trailer for a mockumentary-style short film known as R2-D2: Beneath the Dome.
Some stores offered the full mockumentary as an exclusive bonus disc for a small extra charge.
The film gives an alternate look at the "life" of the droid R2-D2.
The story, which Lucas approved, was meant to be humorous.

The film was re-released in a prequel trilogy DVD box set on November 4, 2008.

The six-film Star Wars saga was released on Blu-ray Disc on September 16, 2011 in three different editions.
On April 7, 2015, Walt Disney Studios, 20th Century Fox, and Lucasfilm jointly announced the digital releases of the six released Star Wars films.
Attack of the Clones was released through the iTunes Store, Amazon Video, Vudu, Google Play, and Disney Movies
Anywhere on April 10, 2015.Walt
Disney Studios Home Entertainment reissued Attack of the Clones on Blu-ray, DVD, and digital download on September 22, 2019.
Additionally, all six films were available for 4K HDR and Dolby Atmos streaming on Disney+ upon the service's launch on November 12, 2019.
This version of the film was released by Disney on 4K Ultra HD Blu-ray on March 31, 2020.
===
3D re-release ===
On September 28, 2010 (2010-09-28), it was announced that all six films in the series were to be stereo-converted to 3D, and re-released in chronological order beginning with The Phantom Menace which was released on February 10, 2012 (2012-02-10).
Attack of the Clones was originally scheduled to be re-released in 3D on September 20, 2013 (2013-09-20), but was postponed due to Lucasfilm's desire to focus on Star Wars: The Force Awakens.
However, the 3D presentation of the film was first shown at Celebration Europe II from July 26 to 28, 2013.

== Reception ==


===
Critical response ===
On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds an approval rating of 65% based on 253 reviews, with an average rating of 6.59/10.
The site's critical consensus reads, "Star Wars Episode II:
Attack of the Clones benefits from an increased emphasis on thrilling action, although they're once again undercut by ponderous plot points and underdeveloped characters.
"
On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 54 out of 100, based on 39 critics, which indicates "mixed or average reviews".
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A–" on an A+ to F scale, the same score as the previous film.
Numerous critics characterized the dialogue as "stiff" and "flat".
The acting was also disparaged by some critics.
Conversely, other critics felt fans would be pleased to see that Jar Jar Binks has only a minor role.
Additionally, Jar Jar's attempts at comic relief seen in The Phantom Menace were toned down; instead, C-3PO reprised some of his bumbling traditions in that role.
McGregor referred to the swordplay in the film as "unsatisfactory" when comparing it to the climactic duel in Revenge of the Sith as it neared release.
ReelViews.net's James Berardinelli gave a positive review, saying "in a time when, more often than not, sequels disappoint, it's refreshing to uncover something this high-profile that fulfills the promise of its name and adds another title to a storied legacy.
"Roger
Ebert, who had praised the previous Star Wars films, gave Episode II only two out of four stars, noting "[As] someone who admired the freshness and energy of the earlier films, I was amazed, at the end of Episode II, to realize that I had not heard one line of quotable, memorable dialogue."
About Anakin and Padme's relationship, Ebert stated, "There is not a romantic word they exchange that has not long since been reduced to cliché."
Leonard Maltin, who also liked all of the previous installments, awarded two stars out of four to this endeavor as well, as seen in his Movie and Video Guide from the 2002 edition onward.
Maltin cited an "overlong story" as reason for his dissatisfaction and added "Wooden characterizations and dialogue don't help.
"Following
suit with the series' previous installments, the Academy Awards nominated Attack of the Clones' Rob Coleman, Pablo Helman, John Knoll, and Ben Snow for Best Visual Effects at the 2003 Academy Awards, but the award ultimately went to The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers.
Natalie Portman was also honored at the Teen Choice Awards, and the film received an award for Best Fight at the MTV Movie Awards.
In contrast, the film also received seven nominations from the Golden Raspberry Awards for Worst Picture, Worst Director (George Lucas), Worst Screenplay (George Lucas), Worst Supporting Actor (Hayden Christensen), Worst Supporting Actress (Natalie Portman), Worst Screen Couple
(Hayden Christensen and Natalie Portman) and Worst Remake or Sequel.
It took home two awards for Worst Screenplay (George Lucas) and Worst Supporting Actor (Hayden Christensen).
===
Box office ===
The film grossed $310,676,740 in North America and $338,721,588 overseas for a worldwide total of $649,398,328.
Though a box office success, it was nevertheless overshadowed by the even greater box-office success of The Phantom Menace three years earlier.
It was not the top-grossing film of the year, either in North America (where it finished in third place) or worldwide (where it was fourth), the first time that a Star Wars film did not have this distinction.
In North America it was outgrossed by Spider-Man and The Lord of the Rings:
The Two Towers, both of which were more favorably received by critics.
Worldwide, it was also outgrossed by Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets.
Adjusted for inflation, Attack of the Clones is the lowest-performing live-action Star Wars film at the North American box office, though is still among the 100 highest-grossing films of all time when adjusted for inflation.
It sold an estimated 52,012,300 tickets in the US in its initial theatrical run.
===
Accolades ===


==
Novelizations ==
Two novels based on the movie were published, a tie-in junior novel by Scholastic, and a novelization written by R. A. Salvatore, which includes some unique scenes.
A four-issue comic book adaptation was written by Henry Gilroy and published by Dark Horse Comics.

==
Sequel ==
A sequel titled Revenge of the Sith was released May 19, 2005 and was written and directed by George Lucas.

== See also ==
List of films featuring extraterrestrials
List of Star Wars films
List of Star Wars television series


==
References ==
Footnotes
Citations


===
Sources ===
Bouzereau, Laurent (1997).
The Annotated Screenplays.
Del Rey.
ISBN 0-345-40981-7.
OCLC 37691005.

Kaminski, Michael (2007). "
The Secret History of Star Wars".
Archived from the original on July 6, 2007.

—— (2008)
[2007].
The Secret History of Star Wars (3.0 ed.).
Legacy Books Press.
ISBN 978-0-9784652-3-0.
==
External links ==

Star Wars Episode II:
Attack of the Clones at StarWars.com
Star Wars Episode II:
Attack of the Clones at Lucasfilm.com
Star Wars Episode II:
Attack of the Clones on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Star Wars Episode II:
Attack of the Clones at IMDb
Star Wars Episode II:
Attack of the Clones at the TCM Movie Database
Star Wars Episode II:
Attack of the Clones at AllMovie
Star Wars Episode II:
Attack of the Clones at Rotten Tomatoes
Star Wars
Episode II:
Attack of the Clones at Box Office Mojo
Star Wars
Episode II:
Attack of the Clones at Metacritic
Star Wars Episode II:
Attack of the Clones at The Numbers
Star Wars Episode II:
Attack of the Clones Official Production Notes
Star Wars:
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith is a 2005 American epic space-opera film written and directed by George Lucas.
It stars Ewan McGregor, Natalie Portman, Hayden Christensen, Ian McDiarmid, Samuel L. Jackson, Christopher Lee, Anthony Daniels, Kenny Baker and Frank Oz.
It is the final installment in the Star Wars prequel trilogy, the third chapter in the Skywalker saga and the sixth Star Wars film to be released overall.

Revenge of the Sith is set three years after the onset of the Clone Wars, established in Star Wars:
Episode II – Attack of the Clones (2002).
The Jedi are spread across the galaxy, leading a large-scale war against the Separatists.
The Jedi Council dispatches Obi-Wan Kenobi to eliminate General Grievous, the leader of the Separatist army, to put an end to the war.
Meanwhile, after having premonitions of his wife Padmé Amidala dying in childbirth, Anakin Skywalker is tasked by the Council to spy on Palpatine, the Supreme Chancellor of the Galactic Republic and, secretly, a Sith lord known as Darth Sidious.
Palpatine manipulates Anakin into turning to the dark side of the Force and becoming his apprentice, Darth Vader, with wide-ranging consequences for the galaxy.
Lucas began writing the script before production of Attack of the Clones ended.
Production of Revenge of the Sith started in September 2003, and filming took place in Australia with additional locations in Thailand, Switzerland, China, Italy and the United Kingdom.

Revenge of the Sith premiered on May 15, 2005, at the Cannes Film Festival, then released worldwide on May 19, 2005.
The film received positive reviews and was deemed an improvement over the first two prequel films, with praise for its action sequences, mature themes, score, visual effects, darker tone, and the performances of McGregor, McDiarmid, Oz, and Jimmy Smits; criticism largely focused on the film's dialogue and aspects of Hayden Christensen's performance.
It broke several box office records during its opening week and went on to earn over $868 million worldwide, making it the second-highest-grossing film in the Star Wars franchise at the time.
It was the highest-grossing film in the U.S. and the second-highest-grossing film worldwide in 2005.
The film also holds the record for the highest opening-day gross on a Thursday, making $50 million.

==
Plot ==
Above Coruscant, Obi-Wan Kenobi and Anakin Skywalker lead a mission to rescue the kidnapped Supreme Chancellor Palpatine from the cyborg Separatist commander General Grievous.
After infiltrating Grievous' flagship, the Jedi battle Sith Lord Count Dooku, whom Anakin overpowers and decapitates at Palpatine's urging.
Grievous escapes the battle-torn ship, which the Jedi crash-land on Coruscant.

There, Anakin reunites with his wife, Padmé Amidala, who reveals that she is pregnant.
While initially excited, Anakin soon begins to have nightmares about Padmé dying in childbirth.
Palpatine appoints Anakin to the Jedi Council as his personal representative.
The Council, suspicious of Palpatine, approve the appointment, but decline to grant Anakin the rank of Jedi Master and instead instruct him to spy on Palpatine, diminishing Anakin's trust in the Jedi.

Grievous is ordered by Darth Sidious to relocate the Separatist Council to the lava planet of Mustafar.
Obi-Wan travels to Utapau, where he kills Grievous, and Yoda travels to the Wookiee homeworld of Kashyyyk to defend it from a Separatist invasion.
Meanwhile, Palpatine tempts Anakin with his knowledge of the Force, including the power to prevent death, which he offers to teach him to save Padmé's life.
Anakin deduces that he is the Sith Lord behind the war and reports Palpatine's treachery to Mace Windu, who confronts and subdues him.
Desperate to save Padmé's life, Anakin disarms Windu before he can kill Palpatine, who sends Windu falling to his death.
Anakin pledges himself to the Sith, and Sidious knights him Darth Vader.

Palpatine then issues Order 66, which commands the clone troopers to kill their commanding Jedi officers, thus sending the Jedi Order into near-extinction.
Meanwhile, Vader and a battalion of clone troopers kill the remaining Jedi in the Jedi Temple, after which Vader travels to the volcanic planet Mustafar to assassinate the Separatist leaders.
Palpatine declares himself Emperor before the Galactic Senate, transforming the Republic into the Galactic Empire, and denounces the Jedi as traitors.
Having survived the chaos, Obi-Wan and Yoda return to Coruscant and learn of Anakin's turn to the dark side.
Yoda orders Obi-Wan to confront Vader while he faces Palpatine.

When Padmé learns of Anakin's treachery, she travels to Mustafar – with Obi-Wan stowing away on her ship – and implores Vader to abandon the dark side, but he refuses.
Sensing Obi-Wan's presence, and thinking that they are conspiring to kill him, Vader angrily uses the Force to strangle Padmé to unconsciousness.
Obi-Wan then engages Vader in a lightsaber duel that ends with Obi-Wan severing Vader's legs and left arm.
Obi-Wan retrieves Vader's lightsaber and leaves him for dead at the bank of a lava flow.

On Coruscant, Yoda battles Palpatine until their duel reaches a stalemate.
Yoda then flees with Senator Bail Organa and regroups with Obi-Wan and Padmé on the planetoid Polis Massa.
There, Padmé gives birth to twins, whom she names Luke and Leia, and dies soon after, having lost her will to live.
On Mustafar, Palpatine retrieves a barely alive Vader and takes him to Coruscant, where his mutilated body is treated and covered in a black armored suit.
Palpatine tells him that he killed Padmé in a blind rage, devastating Vader.

Obi-Wan and Yoda plan to conceal the twins from the Sith and go into exile until the time is right to challenge the Empire.
As Padmé's funeral takes place on her homeworld of Naboo, Palpatine and Vader supervise the construction of the Death Star.
Bail takes Leia to his homeworld of Alderaan, where he and his wife adopt her, while Obi-Wan delivers Luke to his step-uncle and aunt, Owen and Beru Lars, on Tatooine before going into exile to watch over the boy.

== Cast ==
Ewan McGregor as Obi-Wan Kenobi, a Jedi Master, general of the Galactic Republic and Anakin's mentor.

Natalie Portman as Padmé Amidala, a senator of Naboo who is secretly Anakin's wife and pregnant with their children.

Hayden Christensen as Anakin Skywalker, a Jedi Knight, hero of the Clone Wars and former Padawan of Obi-Wan, who turns to the dark side of the Force and becomes the Sith lord Darth Vader.
Christensen also plays Vader in his suit.

Ian McDiarmid as Palpatine / Darth Sidious, the Supreme Chancellor of the Galactic Republic who is secretly a Sith Lord, and later the founder and leader of the Galactic Empire.
He takes advantage of Anakin's distrust of the Jedi and fear of Padmé dying to turn him towards the dark side, becoming Vader's master.

Samuel L. Jackson as Mace Windu, a Jedi Master and senior member of the Jedi Council.

Jimmy Smits as Bail Organa, a senator of Alderaan.

Christopher Lee as Count Dooku / Darth Tyranus, Darth Sidious' Sith apprentice and leader of the Separatists.

Anthony Daniels as C-3PO, Anakin and Padmé's personal protocol droid that Anakin created as a child.

Kenny Baker as R2-D2, Anakin's astromech droid.

Frank Oz as the voice of Yoda, a Jedi Grandmaster and the leader of the Jedi Council.
Peter Mayhew, Oliver Ford Davies, Ahmed Best, and Silas Carson reprise their roles as Chewbacca, Sio Bibble, Jar Jar Binks, and Nute Gunray and Ki-Adi-Mundi, respectively, from the previous films.
Joel Edgerton and Bonnie Piesse also make cameo appearances, reprising their roles as Owen and Beru Lars respectively from Attack of the Clones.
Sound engineer Matthew Wood provides the voice of General Grievous, the fearsome cyborg commander of the Separatists' droid army; Temuera Morrison portrays Commander Cody and the rest of the clone troopers; Bruce Spence portrays Tion Medon, local administrator of Utapau; Jeremy Bulloch (who played Boba Fett in The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi) appears as Captain Colton, the pilot of the Rebel Blockade Runner Tantive IV; Genevieve O'Reilly portrays senator Mon Mothma, though her scene was ultimately cut.
Rohan Nichol portrays Captain Raymus Antilles.
Wayne Pygram appears as a young Wilhuff Tarkin, and stunt coordinator Nick Gillard appears as a Jedi named Cin Drallig (his name spelled backward, without the 'k').
Editor Roger Barton's son Aidan Barton portrays Luke Skywalker and Leia Organa as infants.
James Earl Jones makes an uncredited cameo appearance, reprising his role from previous films as the voice of Darth Vader.
Director and Star Wars creator George Lucas has a cameo as Baron Papanoida, a blue-faced alien in attendance at the Coruscant opera house.
Lucas' son Jett portrays Zett Jukassa, a young Jedi-in-training.
One of Lucas' daughters, Amanda, appears as Terr Taneel, seen in a security hologram, while his other daughter Katie plays a blue-skinned Pantoran named Chi Eekway, visible when Palpatine arrives at the Senate after being saved by the Jedi and talking to Baron Papanoida at the opera house.
Christian Simpson appeared as a stunt double for Hayden Christensen.

==
Production
==
===
Writing ===
Lucas stated that he conceived the Star Wars saga's story in the form of a plot outline in 1973.
However, he later clarified that, at the time of the saga's conception, he had not fully realized the details
—only major plot points.
The film's climactic duel has its basis in the Return of the Jedi novelization, in which Obi-Wan recounts his battle with Anakin that ended with the latter falling "into a molten pit".
Lucas began working on the screenplay for Episode III before the previous film, Attack of the Clones, was released, proposing to concept artists that the film would open with a montage of seven battles on seven planets.
In The Secret History of Star Wars, Michael Kaminski surmises that Lucas found flaws with Anakin's fall to the dark side and radically reorganized the plot.
For example, instead of opening the film with a montage of Clone War battles, Lucas decided to focus on Anakin, ending the first act with him killing Count Dooku, an action that signals his turn to the dark side.
A significant number of fans speculated online about the episode title for the film with rumored titles including Rise of the Empire,
The Creeping Fear (which was also named as the film's title on the official website on April Fool's 2004), and Birth of the Empire.
Eventually, Revenge of the Sith also became a title guessed by fans that George Lucas would indirectly confirm.
The title is a reference to Revenge of the Jedi, the original title of Return of the Jedi; Lucas changed the title scant weeks before the premiere of Return of the Jedi, declaring that Jedi do not seek revenge.
Since Lucas refocused the film on Anakin, he had to sacrifice certain extraneous plot points relating to Attack of the Clones.
Lucas had previously promised fans that he would explain the mystery behind the erasure of the planet Kamino from the Jedi Archives.
However, Lucas abandoned this plot thread in order to devote more time to Anakin's story, leaving the matter unresolved on film.
Lucas had originally planned to include even more ties to the original trilogy, and wrote early drafts of the script in which a 10-year-old Han Solo appeared on Kashyyyk, but the role was not cast or shot.
He also wrote a scene in which Palpatine reveals to Anakin that he created him from midichlorians, and is thus his "father", a clear parallel to Vader's revelation to Luke in The Empire Strikes Back, but Lucas ejected this scene as well.
Another planned scene by Lucas that was written during the early development of the film was a conversation between Master Yoda and the ghostly Qui-Gon Jinn, with Liam Neeson reprising his role as Jinn (he also hinted his possible appearance in the film).
However, the scene was never filmed and Neeson was never recorded, although the scene was present in the film's novelization.
Neeson finally reprised the role in an episode of The Clone Wars in 2011.After principal photography was complete in 2003, Lucas made even more changes in Anakin's character, rewriting the entire "turn" sequence.
Lucas accomplished this "rewrite" through editing the principal footage and filming new scenes during pickups in London in 2004.
In the previous versions, Anakin had myriad reasons for turning to the dark side, one of which was his sincere belief that the Jedi were plotting to take over the Republic.
Although this is still intact in the finished film, by revising and refilming many scenes, Lucas emphasized Anakin's desire to save Padmé from death.
Thus, in the version that made it to theaters, Anakin falls to the dark side primarily to save Padmé.
===
Art design ===
For the Kashyyyk environment, the art department turned to the Star Wars Holiday Special for inspiration.
Over a period of months, Lucas would approve hundreds of designs that would eventually appear in the film.
He would later rewrite entire scenes and action sequences to correspond to certain designs he had chosen.
The designs were then shipped to the pre-visualization department to create moving CGI versions known as animatics.
Ben Burtt would edit these scenes with Lucas in order to pre-visualize what the film would look like before the scenes were filmed.
The pre-visualization footage featured a basic raw CGI environment with equally unprocessed character models performing a scene, typically for action sequences.
Steven Spielberg was brought in as a "guest director" to make suggestions to the art designers for the Mustafar duel, and oversee the pre-visualization of an unused version of the Utapau chase scene.
Later, the pre-visualization and art department designs were sent to the production department to begin "bringing the film out of the concept phase" by building sets, props and costumes.

===
Filming ===
Although the first scene filmed was the final scene to appear in the film (shot during the filming of Attack of the Clones in 2000), the first bulk of principal photography on the film occurred from June 30, 2003 to September 17, 2003, with additional photography occurring at Shepperton Studios in Surrey and Elstree Studios in Hertfordshire from August 2004 to January 31, 2005.
The initial filming took place on sound stages at Fox Studios Australia in Sydney, although practical environments were shot as background footage later to be composited into the film.
These included the limestone mountains depicting Kashyyyk, which were filmed in Phuket, Thailand.
The production company was also fortunate enough to be shooting at the same time that Mount Etna erupted in Italy.
Camera crews were sent to the location to shoot several angles of the volcano that were later spliced into the background of the animatics and the final film version of the planet Mustafar.
While shooting key dramatic scenes, Lucas would often use an "A camera" and "B camera", or the "V technique", a process that involves shooting with two or more cameras at the same time in order to gain several angles of the same performance.
Using the HD technology developed for the film, the filmmakers were able to send footage to the editors the same day it was shot, a process that would require a full 24 hours had it been shot on film.
Footage featuring the planet Mustafar was given to editor Roger Barton, who was on location in Sydney cutting the climactic duel.

Hayden Christensen says Lucas asked him "to bulk up and physically show the maturity that had taken place between the two films.
"
The actor says he worked out with a trainer in Sydney for three months and ate "six meals a day and on every protein, weight gain supplement that man has created" to go from 160 lbs to 185 lbs.
Christensen and Ewan McGregor began rehearsing their climactic lightsaber duel long before Lucas would shoot it.
They trained extensively with stunt coordinator Nick Gillard to memorize and perform their duel together.
As in the previous prequel film, McGregor and Christensen performed their own lightsaber fighting scenes without the use of stunt doubles.
The speed at which Vader and Obi-Wan engage in their duel is mostly the speed at which it was filmed, although there are instances where single frames were removed to increase the velocity of particular strikes.
An example of this occurs as Obi-Wan strikes down on Vader after applying an armlock in the duel's first half.
Revenge of the Sith eventually became the first Star Wars film in which Anakin Skywalker and the suited Darth Vader were played by the same actor in the same film.
As Christensen recounted, it was originally intended to simply have a "tall guy" in the Darth Vader costume, but after "begging and pleading" Christensen persuaded Lucas to have the Vader costume used in the film created specifically to fit him.
The new costume featured shoe lifts and a muscle suit.
It also required Christensen (who is 6 feet or 1.8 metres tall) to look through the helmet's mouthpiece.
In 2004, Gary Oldman was originally approached to provide the voice of General Grievous; however, complications arose during contract negotiations after Oldman learned the film was to be made outside of the Screen Actors Guild, of which he is a member.
He backed out of the role rather than violate the union's rules.
Matthew Wood, who voiced Grievous, disputed this story at Celebration III, held in Indianapolis.
According to him, Oldman is a friend of producer Rick McCallum, and thus recorded an audition as a favor to him, but was not chosen.
Wood, who was also the supervising sound editor, was in charge of the auditions and submitted his audition anonymously in the midst of 30 others, under the initials "A.S." for Alan Smithee.
Days later, he received a phone call asking for the full name to the initials "A.S."


===
Visual effects ===
The post-production department began work during filming and continued until weeks before the film was released in 2005.
Special effects were created using almost all formats, including model work, CGI and practical effects.
The same department later composited all such work into the filmed scenes—both processes taking nearly two years to complete.
Revenge of the Sith has 2,151 shots that use special effects, a world record.
The DVD featurette Within a Minute illustrated the film required 910 artists and 70,441 man-hours to create 49 seconds of footage for the Mustafar duel alone.
Members of Hyperspace, the Official Star Wars Fan Club, received a special look into the production.
Benefits included not only special articles, but they also received access to a webcam that transmitted a new image every 20 seconds during the time it was operating in Fox Studios Australia.
Many times the stars, and Lucas himself, were spotted on the webcam.

=== Removed scenes ===
Lucas excised all the scenes of a group of Senators, including Padmé, Bail Organa, and Mon Mothma (Genevieve O'Reilly), organizing an alliance to prevent Palpatine from usurping any more emergency powers.
Though this is essentially the Rebel Alliance's birth, the scenes were discarded to achieve more focus on Anakin's story.

The scene where Yoda arrives on Dagobah to begin his self-imposed exile was also removed, but is featured as an extended scene in the DVD release, although McCallum stated he hopes Lucas may add it to the release if Lucas releases a six-episode DVD box set.
Bai Ling filmed minor scenes for the film playing a senator, but her role was cut during editing.
She claimed this was because she appeared in a nude pictorial for the June 2005 issue of Playboy, whose appearance on newsstands coincided with the film's May release.
Lucas denied this, stating that the cut had been made more than a year earlier, and that he had cut his own daughter's scenes as well.
The bonus features show an additional removed scene in which Jedi Master Shaak Ti is killed by General Grievous in front of Obi-Wan Kenobi and Anakin Skywalker.
The bonus features also show Kenobi and Skywalker running through Grievous's ship, escaping droids through a fuel tunnel, and arguing over what the droid R2-D2 is saying.

===
Music ===
The music was composed and conducted by John Williams (who has composed and conducted the score for every episode in the Star Wars saga), and performed by the London Symphony Orchestra and London Voices.

The film's soundtrack was released by Sony Pictures Classical Records on May 3, 2005, more than two weeks before the film's release.
A music video titled A Hero Falls was created for the film's theme, "Battle of the Heroes", featuring footage from the film and was also available on the DVD.The soundtrack also came with a collectors' DVD
, Star Wars: A Musical Journey, at no additional cost.
The DVD, hosted by McDiarmid, features 16 music videos set to remastered selections of music from all six film scores, set chronologically through the saga.

==
Releases ==
Star Wars:
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith charity premieres took place in Seattle, Los Angeles, Chicago, Washington D.C., Boston, Denver, Atlanta, San Francisco, and Miami on Thursday, May 12, 2005; and on May 13, 2005, there were two additional charity premiere screenings in George Lucas's hometown of Modesto, California.
The official premiere was at the 2005 Cannes Film Festival (out of competition) on May 16.
Its theatrical release in most other countries took place on May 19 to coincide with the 1999 release of The Phantom Menace
(the 1977 release of A New Hope and the 1983 release of Return of the Jedi were also released on the same day and month, six years apart).
The global outplacement firm Challenger, Gray & Christmas claimed one week before the premiere that it may have cost the U.S. economy approximately US$627 million in lost productivity because of employees who took a day off or reported in sick.
Grauman's Chinese Theatre, a traditional venue for the Star Wars films, did not show it.
However, a line of people stood there for more than a month hoping to convince someone to change this.
Most of them took advantage of an offer to see the film at a nearby cinema, ArcLight Cinemas (formerly the "Cinerama Dome").
On May 16, the Empire Cinema in London's Leicester Square hosted a day-long Star Wars marathon showing of all six films; an army of Imperial stormtroopers "guarded" the area, and the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra gave a free concert of Star Wars music.
===
Leaked workprint ===
A copy of the film leaked onto peer-to-peer file sharing networks just hours after opening in theaters.
The film was a time-stamped workprint, suggesting it may have come from within the industry rather than from someone who videotaped an advance screening.
Eight people were later charged with copyright infringement and distributing material illegally.
Documents filed by the Los Angeles District Attorney allege that a copy of the film was taken from an unnamed Californian post-production office by an employee, who later pleaded guilty to his charges.
The illegal copy was passed among seven people until reaching an eighth party, who also pleaded guilty to uploading to an unnamed P2P network.
Shortly after the above-mentioned print was leaked, it was released in Shanghai as a bootleg DVD with Chinese subtitles.
The unknown producer of this DVD also chose to include English subtitles, which were in fact translated back into English from the Chinese translation, rather than using the original English script.
This resulted in the subtitles being heavily mis-translated, often causing unintentional humor.
For example, in the opening crawl the title is mis-translated as Star War:
The Third Gathers – The Backstroke of the West.
Darth Vader's cry of "Noooooooo!"
(
不要) is rendered as "Do not want".
This translation error would later be popularized as an Internet meme.
In 2016, YouTube user GratefulDeadpool uploaded a fan edit of Revenge of the Sith in which the cast's voices were dubbed by other actors to match the bootleg subtitles.

===
Rating ===
Revenge of the Sith is the first Star Wars film to receive a PG-13 rating from the Motion Picture Association of America (MPAA), officially for "thematic elements sci-fi violence and some intense images", namely for the scene in which Darth Vader is set aflame by lava and molten rock.
Lucas had stated months before the MPAA's decision that he felt the film should receive a PG-13 rating, because of Anakin's final moments and the film's content being the darkest and most intense of all six films.
Some critics, including Roger Ebert and Richard Roeper, later responded that children would be able to handle the film as long as they had parental guidance, hence a "PG rating".
All previously released films in the series were rated PG.

===
Home media ===
The film was released on DVD and VHS on October 31, 2005, in the UK and Ireland; on November 1, 2005, it was released in the United States and Canada on DVD; and on November 3, 2005, it was released in Australia.
It was also released in most major territories on or near the same day.
The DVD included a number of documentaries including a new full-length documentary as well as two featurettes, one which explores the prophecy of Anakin Skywalker as the Chosen One, the other looking at the film's stunts and a 15-part collection of web-documentaries from the official web site.
Like the other DVD releases, included is an audio commentary track featuring Lucas, producer Rick McCallum, animation director Rob Coleman, and ILM visual effects supervisors John Knoll and Roger Guyett.
Six deleted scenes were included with introductions from Lucas and McCallum.

This release is notable because, due to marketing issues, it was the first Star Wars film never to be released on VHS in the United States.
However, the film was released on VHS in Australia, the U.K. and other countries.
The DVD was re-released in a prequel trilogy box set on November 4, 2008.The Star Wars films were released by 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment on Blu-ray on December 16, 2010, in three different editions.
On April 7, 2015, Walt Disney Studios, 20th Century Fox, and Lucasfilm jointly announced the digital releases of the six released Star Wars films.
Revenge of the Sith was released through the iTunes Store, Amazon Video, Vudu, Google Play, and Disney Movies
Anywhere on April 10, 2015.Walt
Disney Studios Home Entertainment reissued Revenge of the Sith on Blu-ray, DVD, and digital download on September 22, 2019.
Additionally, all six films were available for 4K HDR and Dolby Atmos streaming on Disney+ upon the service's launch on November 12, 2019.
This version of the film was released by Disney on 4K Ultra HD Blu-ray on March 31, 2020.
===
3D re-release ===
On September 28, 2010, it was announced that all six films in the series were to be stereo-converted to 3D.
The films would be re-released in chronological order beginning with The Phantom Menace on February 10, 2012.
Revenge of the Sith was originally scheduled to be re-released in 3D on October 11, 2013.
However, on January 28, 2013, Lucasfilm announced that it was postponing the 3D release of episodes II and III in order to "focus 100 percent of our efforts on Star Wars:
The Force Awakens" and that further information about 3D release plans would be issued at a later date.
The premiere of the 3D version was shown on April 17, 2015, at Star Wars Celebration Anaheim.

== Reception ==


===
Critical response ===
On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 80% based on 300 reviews, with an average rating of 7.3/10.
The site's critical consensus reads, "With Episode III: Revenge of the Sith
, George Lucas brings his second Star Wars trilogy to a suitably thrilling and often poignant – if still a bit uneven – conclusion."
On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 68 out of 100, based on 40 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews".
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A–" on an A+ to F scale, the same score as the previous two films.
Most critics have considered the film to be the best of the prequel trilogy.
A. O. Scott of The New York Times concluded that it was "the best of the four episodes Mr. Lucas has directed", and equal to The Empire Strikes Back as "the richest and most challenging movie in the cycle".
In a 2007 summary of the 100 Best Science-Fiction Films on Rotten Tomatoes, Revenge of the Sith was placed 51 out of 100, making it the only Star Wars prequel film to earn a rank on that list.
J.R. Jones, a Chicago Reader critic who disliked The Phantom Menace and Attack of the Clones, gave the film a positive review, saying that it had a "relatively thoughtful story".
Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times gave the film three-and-a-half out of four stars, writing "If [Lucas] got bogged down in solemnity and theory in Episode II:
Attack of the Clones, the Force is in a jollier mood this time, and Revenge of the Sith is a great entertainment", but he noted that "the dialogue throughout the movie is once again its weakest point".

In 2012, Glittering Images art critic Camille Paglia praised the film, comparing some of its scenes to works by modern painters and calling it "the greatest work of art in recent memory".
Paglia explained that the film's finale ...has more inherent artistic value, emotional power, and global impact than anything by the artists you name.
It's because the art world has flat-lined and become an echo chamber of received opinion and toxic over-praise.
It's like the emperor's new clothes -- people are too intimidated to admit what they secretly think or what they might think with their blinders off.
Episode III epitomizes the modern digital art movement, more so than other piece from the last 30 years.
I had considered using Japanese anime for the digital art chapter of the book, but it lacked the overwhelming operatic power and yes, seriousness of Lucas's Revenge of the Sith.

Though many critics and fans viewed Revenge of the Sith as the strongest of the three prequels, some viewers thought it was more or less on par with the previous two episodes.
Much of the criticism was directed towards the dialogue, particularly the film's romantic scenes; critics claimed this demonstrated Lucas's weakness as a writer of dialogue, a subject with which Lucas openly agreed when receiving the Lifetime Achievement Award from the American Film Institute.
Some film critics and fans criticized Hayden Christensen's acting, calling it "wooden".
Some American conservatives criticized the film, claiming it had a liberal bias and was a commentary on the George W. Bush administration and Iraq War.
Some websites went so far as to propose a boycott of the film.
Lucas defended the film, stating that the film's storyline was written during the Vietnam War and was influenced by that conflict rather than the war in Iraq.
Lucas did say, however, that "The parallels between Vietnam and what we're doing in Iraq now are unbelievable".
===
Box office ===
The film was released in 115 countries.
Its worldwide gross eventually reached $849 million—making it the second most financially successful film of 2005, behind Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire.
The film earned an estimated $16.91 million from 2,900 midnight screenings in North America upon its release.
In total, it earned a record $50 million on its opening day.
It was surpassed the following year by Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest, which earned $55.5 million on its opening day.
With only the May 19 earnings, the film broke four box office records: midnight screenings gross (previously held by The Lord of the Rings:
The Return of the King, $8 million), opening day gross (Spider-Man 2, with $40.4 million), single day gross (Shrek 2 with $44.8 million) and Thursday gross (
The Matrix Reloaded with $37.5 million).
Its single day and opening day gross records were later surpassed by Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest on July 7, 2006, when that movie grossed $55.5 million on its opening day, and its midnight screening gross was broken by The Dark Knight on July 18, 2008 with $18.5 million.
According to box office analysis sites, the film set American records for highest gross in a given number of days for each of its first 12 days of release except for the seventh and eighth, where the record is narrowly held by Spider-Man 2.
On its fifth day, it became the highest-grossing film of 2005, surpassing Hitch ($177.6 million).
The film earned $158.5 million in its first four-day period, surpassing the previous four-day record held by The Matrix Reloaded ($134.3 million), and joining Spider-Man, The Matrix Reloaded and Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire as one the only films to make $100 million in three days.
In eight days, it reached the $200 million mark (a record tied with Spider-Man 2) and by its 17th day, the film had passed $300 million (surpassing the record of 18 days of Shrek 2).
It was eventually the third-fastest film (after Shrek 2 and Spider-Man) to reach $350 million.
The film ended its run in American theaters on October 20, 2005, finishing with a total gross of $380,270,577.
It ranks 29th in all-time domestic grosses and is the highest-grossing U.S. of 2005, out-grossing second-place
The Chronicles of Narnia:
The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe by nearly $90 million.
The film sold an estimated 59,324,600 tickets in the US.
It topped the domestic box office for two consecutive weekends before being overtaken by Madagascar and The Longest Yard (which were in their second weekends).International grosses that exceeded $460 million include those Australia ($27.2 million), France and Algeria ($56.9 million), Germany ($47.3 million), Italy ($11.3 million), Japan ($82.7 million), Mexico ($15.3 million), South Korea ($10.3 million), Spain ($23.8 million), and the United Kingdom and Ireland ($72.8 million).
===
Accolades ===
Following the release of Revenge of the Sith—the completion of the original and prequel Star Wars series—on June 9, 2005, George Lucas was presented with the 33rd American Film Institute Lifetime Achievement Award.
The institute honored his "astonishing contributions to the art and technology of filmmaking, as well as the impact of the epic Star Wars series".
Despite being the prequel trilogy's best reviewed and received film, it received fewer award nominations than the previous films.
It became the only Star Wars film not to be nominated for an Academy Award for Best Visual Effects; however, it was nominated for Best Makeup (Dave Elsey and Nikki Gooley), losing to The Chronicles of Narnia:
The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe.
It also won "Favorite Motion Picture" and "Favorite Dramatic Motion Picture" awards at the People's Choice Awards, "Hollywood Movie of the Year" award at the Hollywood Film Festival, Empire Awards (Sci-Fi/Fantasy Film), and the Teen Choice Award for Choice Movie – Action.
As did every film of the original trilogy, the film won the Saturn Award for Best Science Fiction Film.
Williams also won Best Music.
The film was nominated for ten Saturn Awards overall, including Best Director and Best Writing for Lucas, Best Actor for Christensen, Best Actress for Natalie Portman and Best Supporting Actor for Ian McDiarmid.
Of the three Star Wars prequels, the film received the fewest Golden Raspberry Awards nominations: only one, for Christensen as Worst Supporting Actor, which he won.
(
The Phantom Menace and Attack of the Clones received seven nominations each, with one and two wins, respectively.)
It is the only Star Wars prequel not to receive a Razzie nomination for "Worst Picture".
Christensen further won the "Best Villain" award at the MTV Movie Awards.
The film also received the fewest nominations (and no wins) at the 2005 Stinkers Bad Movie Awards: Worst Screenplay for a Film Grossing More Than $100M and Worst On-Screen Couple (Christensen and Portman).

==
Themes ==
Throughout Revenge of the Sith, Lucas refers to a wide range of films and other sources, drawing on political, military, and mythological motifs to enhance his story's impact.
Perhaps the most media coverage was given to a particular exchange between Anakin and Obi-Wan, which led to the aforementioned controversy: "If you're not with me, then you're my enemy", Anakin declares.
Despite Lucas' insistence to the contrary, The Seattle Times concluded, "Without naming Bush or the Patriot Act, it's all unmistakable no matter what your own politics may be.
"McDiarmid, Lucas, and others have also called Anakin's journey to the dark side Faustian in the sense of making a "pact with the devil" for short-term gain, with the fiery volcano planet Mustafar representing hell.
Midway through the film, Lucas intercuts between Anakin and Padmé by themselves, thinking about one another in the Jedi Temple and their apartment, respectively, during sunset.
The sequence is without dialogue and complemented by a moody, synthesized soundtrack.
Lucas' coverage of the exterior cityscapes, skylines and interior isolation in the so-called "Ruminations" sequence is similar to the cinematography and mise-en-scène of Rosemary's Baby, a film in which a husband makes a literal pact with the devil.

==
Other media ==


===
Novelization ===
The film's novelization was written by Matthew Stover.
It includes much more dialogue than the film, and certain story elements were fleshed out further in the novelization, such as Anakin and Palpatine's relationship and Palpatine's apprenticeship to Darth Plagueis.
===
Video game ===
A video game based on the film was released on May 5, 2005, two weeks before the film.
The game followed the film's storyline for the most part, integrating scenes from the film.
However, many sections of the game featured scenes cut from the film, or entirely new scenes for the game.
The style of the game was mostly lightsaber combat and fighting as Obi-Wan or Anakin.
It also has a form of multiplayer mode, which includes both "VS" and "Cooperative" mode.
In the first mode, two players fight with characters of their choice against each other in a lightsaber duel to the death.
In the latter mode, two players team up to combat increasingly difficult waves of enemies.

===
The Clone Wars and subsequent Star Wars media ===
The 2008 animated film and subsequent television series fill the three-year gap between the events of Attack of the Clones and Revenge of the Sith.
Several plot threads planned but ultimately dropped from Revenge of the Sith were instead incorporated into The Clone Wars; these included Boba Fett's revenge plot against Mace Windu for his father Jango's death, as well as the mystery behind deceased Jedi Master Sifo-Dyas introduced in Attack of the Clones.
The final four episodes of the series take place concurrently with Revenge of the Sith.
Several scenes from the film were recreated and expanded for these episodes in order to showcase the whereabouts of Anakin Skywalker's former Padawan Ahsoka Tano during the events of the film.
While Ahsoka was a major character in The Clone Wars, she is not alluded to in Revenge of the Sith as the character had not yet been created when the film was in production.

==
See also ==
List of films featuring extraterrestrials
List of films featuring space stations
List of Star Wars films
List of Star Wars television series


==
References ==


===
Footnotes ===


===
Citations ===


===
Sources ===


==
External links ==
Star Wars Episode III: Revenge of the Sith at StarWars.com
Star Wars Episode III: Revenge of the Sith at Lucasfilm.com
Star Wars Episode III: Revenge of the Sith on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Star Wars Episode III: Revenge of the Sith at IMDb
Star Wars Episode III: Revenge of the Sith title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
Star Wars Episode III: Revenge of the Sith at the TCM Movie Database
Star Wars Episode III: Revenge of the Sith at AllMovie
Star Wars Episode III: Revenge of the Sith at Rotten Tomatoes
Star Wars Episode III: Revenge of the Sith at Box Office Mojo
Star Wars Episode III: Revenge of the Sith at Metacritic
Star Wars:
The Force Awakens (also known as Star Wars:
Episode VII – The Force Awakens) is a 2015 American epic space opera film produced, co-written, and directed by J. J. Abrams.
Produced by Lucasfilm and Abrams' production company Bad Robot Productions, and distributed by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures, it is the first installment in the Star Wars
sequel trilogy, following Return of the Jedi (1983), and the seventh episode of the nine-part "Skywalker saga".
The film's ensemble cast includes Harrison Ford, Mark Hamill, Carrie Fisher, Adam Driver, Daisy Ridley, John Boyega, Oscar Isaac, Lupita Nyong'o, Andy Serkis, Domhnall Gleeson, Anthony Daniels, Peter Mayhew, and Max von Sydow.
Set thirty years after Return of the Jedi, The Force Awakens follows Rey, Finn, Poe Dameron, and Han Solo's search for Luke Skywalker and their fight in the Resistance, led by General Leia Organa and veterans of the Rebel Alliance, against Kylo Ren and the First Order, a successor to the Galactic Empire.

The film was announced after The Walt Disney Company's acquisition of Lucasfilm in October 2012.
The film is the first Star Wars film to not extensively involve franchise creator George Lucas, who only served as a creative consultant in the early stages of production.
The film was produced by Abrams, his longtime collaborator Bryan Burk, and Lucasfilm president Kathleen Kennedy.
Abrams and Lawrence Kasdan, co-writer of the original trilogy films
The Empire Strikes Back (1980) and Return of the Jedi, rewrote an initial script by Michael Arndt.
John Williams, composer for the previous episodic films, returned to compose the score.
Filming began in April 2014 in Abu Dhabi and Iceland, with principal photography also taking place in Ireland and at Pinewood Studios in England, and wrapped in November.

The Force Awakens premiered in Los Angeles on December 14, 2015, and was released in the United States on December 18.
The film received positive reviews for its screenplay, direction, acting performances (particularly those of Ford, Driver, Ridley, Isaac, and Boyega), musical score, visual effects, editing, and action sequences, although some critics found it too similar to A New Hope (1977).
The film marked an improvement in a reception over the previous four Star Wars films.
The film broke various box office records and became the highest-grossing installment in the franchise, the highest-grossing film in the United States and Canada, the highest-grossing film of 2015, and the third-highest-grossing film at the time of its release, with a worldwide gross of over $2 billion and a net profit of over $780 million.
Among films' box office adjusted for inflation, the film is the top-grossing sequel of all time in North America.
The film received numerous accolades, including five nominations at the 88th Academy Awards and four nominations at the 69th British Academy Film Awards, where it won the award for Best Special Visual Effects.
Two sequels within the sequel trilogy have been released: The Last Jedi (2017) and The Rise of Skywalker (2019).

==
Plot ==
Thirty years after the Galactic Civil War, the First Order has risen from the fallen Galactic Empire and seeks to end the New Republic.
The Resistance, backed by the Republic and led by General Leia Organa, opposes the First Order.
Leia searches for her brother, Luke Skywalker, who has gone missing.

On the desert planet Jakku, Resistance pilot Poe Dameron receives a map to Luke's place from Lor San Tekka.
Stormtroopers commanded by Kylo Ren raid the village and capture Poe, while Kylo kills San Tekka.
Poe's droid, BB-8, escapes with the map and encounters a scavenger named Rey.
Kylo tortures Poe using the Force and learns of BB-8.
Stormtrooper FN-2187, disillusioned by the First Order, frees Poe, and they escape in a stolen TIE fighter.
Upon learning that FN-2187 has no other name, Poe gives him the name "Finn".
As they head to Jakku to retrieve BB-8, a First Order Star Destroyer shoots them, and they crash-land.
Finn survives and assumes that Poe died in the crash.
He encounters Rey and BB-8, but the First Order tracks them and launches an airstrike.
Rey, Finn, and BB-8 steal the Millennium Falcon and escape the planet.

The Falcon gets discovered and boarded by Han Solo and Chewbacca.
Gangs seeking to settle debts with Han attack, but the group escape in the Falcon.
At the First Order's Starkiller Base, a planet converted into a superweapon, Supreme Leader Snoke allows General Hux to use the weapon for the first time.
Snoke questions
Kylo's ability to deal with emotions on his father, Han Solo, who Kylo states means nothing to him.

Aboard the Falcon, Han determines that BB-8's map is incomplete.
He then explains that Luke attempted to rebuild the Jedi Order but exiled himself when an apprentice turned to the dark side, destroyed the temple, and slaughtered the other apprentices.
The crew travels to the planet Takodana and meets with cantina owner Maz Kanata, who offers help getting BB-8 to the Resistance.
The Force draws Rey to a secluded vault, where she finds the lightsaber once belonging to Luke and his father, Anakin Skywalker.
She experiences disturbing visions and flees into the woods, confused and terrified.
Maz gives Finn the lightsaber for safekeeping.

Starkiller Base destroys the New Republic and its fleet.
The First Order attacks Takodana in search of BB-8.
Han, Chewbacca, and Finn are saved by Resistance X-wing fighters led by Poe, who survived the crash.
Leia arrives at Takodana with C-3PO and reunites with Han.
Meanwhile, Kylo captures Rey and takes her to Starkiller Base, but she resists his mind-reading attempts.
Snoke orders Kylo to bring Rey to him.
Discovering she can use the Force, Rey escapes using a Jedi mind trick on a guard.

At the Resistance base on D'Qar, BB-8 finds R2-D2, who had been inactive since Luke's disappearance.
As Starkiller Base prepares to fire once more, the Resistance devises a plan to destroy it by attacking its thermal oscillator.
Using the Falcon, Han, Chewbacca, and Finn infiltrate the facility, find Rey, and plant explosives.
Han confronts Kylo and implores him to abandon the dark side.
Kylo seems to consider this, but ultimately refuses and kills his father.
Devastated, Chewbacca shoots Kylo and sets off the explosives, allowing Poe to attack and destroy the base's thermal oscillator.

The injured Kylo pursues Finn and Rey into the woods.
Finn fights Kylo with the lightsaber to protect Rey before Kylo knocks him unconscious.
Rey takes the lightsaber and channels the Force to defeat Kylo in a duel; they are then separated by a fissure as the planet's surface begins to splinter.
Snoke orders Hux to evacuate and bring Kylo to him to complete his training.
Chewbacca rescues Rey and the unconscious Finn, and they escape aboard the Falcon.
As the Resistance forces flee, Starkiller Base implodes.
R2-D2 awakens and reveals the rest of the map, which Rey uses to find the oceanic planet
Ahch-To in the Falcon.

On Ahch-To, Rey finds Luke atop a cliff on a remote island.
Without a word, she presents him with his father's lightsaber.

== Cast ==
Harrison Ford as Han Solo: A rogue and a smuggler, formerly a key player in the Rebel Alliance.
Ford said, "[Han] does not aspire to the position of Obi-Wan, nor do I aspire to be some New Age Alec Guinness.
His development is consistent with the character, and there are emotional elements which have occasioned his growth.
[...]
There's a lot of the rogue still left in Solo.
Some things don't change."

Mark Hamill as Luke Skywalker:
The last Jedi, who has gone into hiding.
Regarding Luke, Han, and Leia, Abrams stated: "They'd be as old and as mythic as the tale of King Arthur.
They would be characters who [the new characters] may have heard of, but maybe not.
They'd be characters who they might believe existed, or just sounded like a fairy tale.
"
Hamill was initially skeptical of Luke only appearing at the end of the film and called his limited screentime "a great surprise".
Abrams added that the film's ending was intended to be "this great long drumroll up to seeing this guy".

Carrie Fisher as General Leia Organa: The former princess of the destroyed planet Alderaan, now General of the Resistance, and Luke's twin sister.
After the events of Return of the Jedi, she is described as "a little more battle weary, a little more broken hearted".
Fisher described Leia as "Solitary.
Under a lot of pressure.
Committed as ever to her cause, but I would imagine feeling somewhat defeated, tired, and pissed."
Abrams said: "The stakes are pretty high in the story for her, so there's not much goofing around where Leia's concerned."

Adam Driver as Kylo Ren: A dark warrior who is strong with the Force, the leader of the Knights of Ren, and a high-ranking member of the First Order.
He is the son of Han and Leia, nephew of Luke, and the grandson of the deceased Darth Vader.
Driver said the team tried "not to think of him as being bad, or evil, or a villain.
Something that was more three-dimensional.
He's more dangerous and unpredictable, and morally justified in doing what he thinks is right."

Daisy Ridley as Rey: A highly Force-sensitive scavenger who was abandoned as a child on the desert planet Jakku and awaits her absent family's return.
Ridley said: "She's completely self-sufficient and does everything for herself, until she meets [Finn] and an adventure begins.
"Cailey
Fleming as young Rey
John Boyega as Finn: A reformed First Order stormtrooper.
Boyega said that he learned he obtained the part "over a nice breakfast in Mayfair" during which Abrams told him, "John, you're the new star of Star Wars."
Boyega said: "When we find Finn, he's in incredible danger.
And the way he reacts to this danger changes his life, and launches him into the Star Wars universe in a very unique way."
He said in another interview: "He's been taught about Luke Skywalker, he knows about his history.
For him it's like joining the army and then learning about one of the great enemies of your country."

Oscar Isaac as Poe Dameron: A Resistance X-wing fighter pilot.
Isaac said: "He's the best freaking pilot in the galaxy, [...]
He's been sent on a mission by a certain princess, and he ends up coming up across [Finn], and their fates are forever intertwined."

Lupita Nyong'o as Maz Kanata: A wise and perceptive figure operating a somewhat shady cantina on the peaceful forest planet Takodana who is acquainted with Han.
Abrams said Kanata has "lived over a thousand years.
She's had this watering hole for about a century, and it's like another bar that you'd find in a corner of the Star Wars universe."
According to Abrams, the character was based on his former high school English teacher, Rose Gilbert, who lectured at the Palisades Charter High School from 1961 to 2013.
Abrams said the team "really wanted the story to feel authentic, despite being a wild fantasy.
I mentioned Rose in an early story meeting as a sort of timeless, wise figure that I'd actually known in my life."

Andy Serkis as Supreme Leader Snoke:
The political leader of the First Order.
He is Kylo Ren's master, who seduced him to the dark side and is very powerful in the dark side of the Force.
Serkis described Snoke as "quite an enigmatic character, and strangely vulnerable at the same time as being quite powerful, [...]
He is large.
He appears tall.
And also just the facial design—you couldn't have gotten there with prosthetics.
[...]
Without giving too much away at this point, he has a very distinctive, idiosyncratic bone and facial structure."

Domhnall Gleeson as General Hux:
The commander of the First Order's Starkiller Base.
Gleeson described him as "pretty ruthless.
A strong disciplinarian would be a mild way of putting it.
[...]
He's kind of opposite Kylo Ren.
They have their own relationship, which is individual and unusual.
One of them is strong in different ways than the other.
They're both vying for power."

Anthony Daniels as C-3PO: A humanoid protocol droid in Organa's service.
Daniels said the actors were allowed to experiment with their performances, and that Abrams "made a field, a playpen where you were allowed to take your time and suggest things".

Max von Sydow as Lor San Tekka: A retired adventurer on Jakku, aiding the Resistance in finding Skywalker.

Peter Mayhew as Chewbacca:
A Wookiee and Solo's longtime companion.
Mayhew's double Joonas Suotamo portrays the character in several action scenes, and Ian Whyte performed stunts, as the 71-year-old Mayhew suffered from knee problems.
Tim Rose and Mike Quinn reprise their respective roles as Admiral Ackbar and Nien Nunb from Return of the Jedi, with Erik Bauersfeld and Kipsang Rotich returning their respective voices.
Kenny Baker, originally announced as part of the cast, was credited as "consultant" for R2-D2, with Jimmy Vee performing some of the work for R2-D2.
Ewan McGregor has an uncredited vocal cameo as Obi-Wan Kenobi in Rey's vision sequence, while archival audio of Frank Oz and Alec Guinness as Yoda and Kenobi, respectively, are also used in the same scene; Oz recorded new dialogue for the film, but it was replaced with preexisting audio from The Empire Strikes Back.
Gwendoline Christie portrays Captain Phasma, the commander of the First Order's legions of stormtroopers.
Dave Chapman and Brian Herring served as puppeteers for BB-8, with Bill Hader and Ben Schwartz credited as "Vocal Consultants".
Ken Leung appears as Statura, an admiral in the Resistance.
Simon Pegg appears as Unkar Plutt, the Junk parts dealer on Jakku.
Greg Grunberg plays Temmin "Snap" Wexley, an X-wing pilot.
Kiran Shah plays Teedo, a scavenger on Jakku who rides a semi-mechanical Luggabeast.
Jessica Henwick appears as Jess "Testor" Pava or Jess Testor, an X-wing pilot.
Brian Vernel appears as Bala-Tik, the leader of the Guavian Death Gang.
Yayan Ruhian and Iko Uwais appear as Tasu Leech and Razoo Qin-Fee, members of the Kanjiklub Gang, a criminal organization.
Warwick Davis appears as Wollivan, a tavern-dweller in Maz Kanata's castle.
Anna Brewster appears as Bazine Netal, a First Order spy, also at Maz Kanata's castle.
Hannah John-Kamen appears as a First Order officer.
Thomas Brodie-Sangster and Kate Fleetwood play First Order Petty Officers, Thanisson and Unamo, respectively.
Billie Lourd, daughter of Carrie Fisher, appears as Connix, a lieutenant in the Resistance.
Members of the Resistance include Emun Elliott as Brance and Maisie Richardson-Sellers as Korr Sella while Harriet Walter appears as Kalonia, the doctor who tends to Chewbacca.
Mark Stanley appears as a Knight of Ren.
Sebastian Armesto portrays Lieutenant Mitaka and Pip Torrens portrays Colonel Kaplan, both serving the First Order.
Daniel Craig, Michael Giacchino, and Nigel Godrich cameo as stormtroopers.
Abrams' assistant, Morgan Dameron, appears as a Resistance officer, while his father, Gerald W. Abrams, appears as Captain Cypress.
The film's dialect coach, Andrew Jack, appears as Major Ematt of the Resistance.
Additionally, Crystal Clarke, Pip Andersen, Christina Chong, Miltos Yerolemou, Amybeth Hargreaves, Leanne Best, Judah Friedlander, and Kevin Smith appear in minor roles.
Riot control stormtrooper FN-2199, who calls Finn a traitor during the battle on Takodana, was portrayed by stunt performer Liang Yang and voiced by sound editor David Acord.

==
Production ==


===
Development ===
Star Wars creator George Lucas discussed ideas for a sequel trilogy several times after the conclusion of the original trilogy, but denied any intent to make it.
In October 2012, he sold his production company Lucasfilm to The Walt Disney Company.
Speaking alongside Lucasfilm's new president, Kathleen Kennedy, Lucas said: "I always said I wasn't going to do any more
and that's true, because I'm not going to do any more, but that doesn't mean I'm unwilling to turn it over to Kathy to do more.
"As
creative consultant on the film, Lucas attended early story meetings and advised on the details of the Star Wars universe.
Among the materials he turned over to the production team were his rough story treatments for Episodes VII–IX, which Lucas requested be read only by Kennedy, Bob Iger, Alan F. Horn, and Kevin A. Mayer.
Lucas later said Disney had discarded his story ideas and that he had no further involvement with the film.
Lucas' son Jett told The Guardian that his father was "very torn" about having sold the rights to the franchise and that his father was "there to guide" but that "he wants to let it go and become its new generation".

The Force Awakens' first screenplay was written by Michael Arndt.
Early drafts had Luke Skywalker appear midway through the film, but Arndt found that "every time Luke came in and entered the movie, he just took it over.
Suddenly you didn't care about your main character anymore.
"
The writers decided to use Luke as the film's MacGuffin and, as something that the protagonists needed to find, would not appear in person until the final scene.
Arndt also developed some backstory elements for the returning characters from the original trilogy, such as how Leia was instrumental in rebuilding the Republic after the fall of the Empire before being discredited when it was publicly revealed that her biological father was Darth Vader (this would go on to become a central plot point in the canonical novel Star Wars:
Bloodline).Several directors were considered, including David Fincher, Brad Bird, Jon Favreau, and Guillermo del Toro; after a suggestion by Steven Spielberg to Kennedy, J. J. Abrams was named director in January 2013, with Lawrence Kasdan and Simon Kinberg as project consultants.
Arndt worked on the script for eight months, but said he needed 18 more, which was more time than Disney or Abrams could give him.
The production announced Arndt's exit from the project on October 24, 2013, and Kasdan and Abrams took over script duties.
Abrams expressed relief that the release date was announced for December 2015 instead of a previously discussed summer release.
He and Kasdan planned the story while walking in Santa Monica, New York City, Paris, and London.
The first draft was completed in six weeks.
Abrams said the key to the film was [returned] to the roots of the first Star Wars films and be based more on emotion than explanation.
In January 2014, Abrams confirmed that the script was complete.
In April 2014, Lucasfilm clarified that Episodes VII–IX would not feature storylines from the Star Wars expanded universe, though other elements could be included, as with the TV series Star Wars Rebels.
Abrams stated that he purposely withheld some plot elements from The Force Awakens, such as Rey and Finn's last names and backgrounds.
Kennedy admitted that "we haven't mapped out every single detail [of the sequel trilogy] yet", but said that Abrams was collaborating with The Last Jedi director Rian Johnson, and that Johnson would work with The Rise of Skywalker's then-director Colin Trevorrow to ensure a smooth transition and that "everybody's got a say in how we move forward with this".
Daisy Ridley later recounted that J. J. Abrams had written drafts for episodes 8 and 9.A fictional language was developed for use in the film by YouTube star Sara Forsberg, who created the viral video series "What Languages Sound Like To Foreigners"; Forsberg developed the language by studying various languages, such as Hindi and Gujarati.
In November 2015, Lucas recorded an hour-long interview with CBS News reporter Charlie Rose in which he said Disney had not been "keen" to involve him and conceded: "If I get in there, I'm just going to cause trouble because they're not going to do what I want them to do, and I don't have the control to do that any more, and all it would do is just muck everything up.
"
He also said, "They wanted to do a retro movie.
I don't like that.
Every movie, I worked very hard to make them different
[...] I made them completely different—different planets, different spaceships to make it new.
"
In early December 2015, Kathleen Kennedy told The Hollywood Reporter that Lucas had seen the movie and "liked it".
In the same month, at the Kennedy Center Honors, Lucas stated, "I think the fans are going to love it
, It's very much the kind of movie they've been looking for."
Abrams felt that, as the first in a new trilogy, the film "needed to take a couple of steps backwards into very familiar terrain" and use plot elements from previous Star Wars films.

=== Pre-production ===
In May 2013, it was confirmed that The Force Awakens would be filmed in the United Kingdom.
Representatives from Lucasfilm met with Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne to agree to produce The Force Awakens in the UK.
Osborne committed £25 million of public money towards the film, claiming it was a boost for British culture and its film industry.
According to production company account filings in the United Kingdom, The Force Awakens ultimately received a total of £31.6 million ($47.4 million) from the government.
Beginning in September 2013, production spaces at the Bad Robot facility were converted for shooting of The Force Awakens for the benefit of shooting a minor portion of the film in the United States.
The film's costume designer was Michael Kaplan, who had previously worked with Abrams on the films Star Trek (2009) and Star Trek Into Darkness (2013).
Film editors Mary Jo Markey and Maryann Brandon, long-term collaborators with Abrams, were also signed.
In August 2013, it was announced that cinematographer Daniel Mindel would be shooting the film on 35 mm film (specifically Kodak 5219).
In October 2013, other crew members were confirmed, including sound designer Ben Burtt, director of photography Mindel, production designers Rick Carter and Darren Gilford, costume designer Michael Kaplan, special effects supervisor Chris Corbould, re-recording mixer Gary Rydstrom, supervising sound editor Matthew Wood, visual effects supervisors Roger Guyett, and executive producer Jason McGatlin.
===
Casting ===
Open auditions were held in the United Kingdom and the United States in November 2013 for the roles of Rachel and Thomas.
Casting began in earnest in January 2014, because of changes to the script by Kasdan and Abrams.
Screen tests with actors continued until at least three weeks before the official announcement in April 2014, with final casting decisions made only a few weeks earlier.
Actors testing had strict nondisclosure agreements, preventing them, their agents or their publicists from commenting on their involvement.
Though Lucas intimated that previous cast members Carrie Fisher, Harrison Ford, and Mark Hamill would return for the new film as early as March 2013, their casting was not confirmed until over a year later.
Saoirse Ronan, Michael B. Jordan, Lupita Nyong'o and Frida Gustavsson, auditioned for new characters; industry publications reported Jesse Plemons was considered, possibly for Luke Skywalker's son;
Adam Driver for an unnamed villain; and Maisie Richardson-Sellers for an unknown character.
Daisy Ridley was cast by February 2014, and by the end of that month a deal had been worked out with Driver, who was able to work around his Girls schedule.
Talks with Andy Serkis and Oscar Isaac began by March and continued into April.
That same month, John Boyega began talks after dropping out of a Jesse Owens biopic.
Denis Lawson, who played Wedge Antilles in the original trilogy, declined to reprise his role, saying it would have "bored" him.
In April, the cast was announced with a photo of the first table read of the script at Pinewood Studios near London, picturing director Abrams with Ford, Ridley, Fisher, Peter Mayhew, producer Bryan Burk, Lucasfilm president and producer Kathleen Kennedy, Domhnall Gleeson, Anthony Daniels, Hamill, Serkis, Isaac, Boyega, Driver, and writer Lawrence Kasdan.
In June, cast additions Lupita Nyong'o and Gwendoline Christie were announced.
To prepare for his role, Hamill was assigned a personal trainer and a nutritionist at the request of the producers, who wanted him to resemble an older Luke.
Fisher was also assigned a personal trainer and a nutritionist.
Abrams initially considered using Daniels only in a voice role for C-3PO, but Daniels opted to reprise the role physically as well; the production team built a new C-3PO costume to accommodate him.
A flashback scene was cut from Rey's vision (following her discovery of Luke's lightsaber), which would have featured Robert Boulter standing in for Luke as he appeared in his duel with Vader in The Empire Strikes Back.
In May, Abrams announced a donation contest for UNICEF from the Star Wars set in Abu Dhabi; the winner was allowed to visit the set, meet members of the cast and appear in the film.
In October, Warwick Davis, who played Wicket in Return of the Jedi, as well as Wald and Weazle in The Phantom Menace (1999), announced that he would appear in The Force Awakens, but did not reveal his role.
In November, Debbie Reynolds confirmed that her granddaughter (Fisher's daughter), Billie Lourd, was in the film.

===
Filming ===
In February 2014, Abrams said filming would begin in May and last about three months.
The official announcement came in March, when Disney and Lucasfilm announced that principal photography would commence in May and be based at Pinewood Studios in Buckinghamshire, England.
That month, it was revealed that pre-production filming would take place in Iceland prior to the start of official filming in May, consisting of landscape shots that would be used for scenery in the film.
In April, Walt Disney Studios chairman Alan Horn confirmed that filming had begun, filming in secret in the United Arab Emirates around Liwa Oasis, part of the emirate of Abu Dhabi, by a second unit.
Later that month, it was revealed that in addition to 35 mm film, segments of the film were being shot in the 65 mm IMAX format.
In July, Bad Robot reported via Twitter that the film would be at least partially shot on IMAX cameras.
On May 4, 2014, the studio posted a selfie taken by Disney CEO Bob Iger with an unidentified actor in a Chewbacca costume.
Iger said the photo was taken when he visited Pinewood Studios two weeks earlier to discuss the shoot, "which was just about to start", with Abrams, Kennedy, and Horn.
Principal photography began in Abu Dhabi on May 16, 2014.
Abrams and the cast members went to Abu Dhabi in early-May, where large sets were built on location—including a shuttle-like spacecraft, a large tower, and a big market—and where explosives were used to create a "blast crater".
Cast members were spotted practicing driving vehicles that would be used during filming.
Production moved to Pinewood Studios in June.

That same month, Harrison Ford fractured his leg while filming at Pinewood after a hydraulic door on the Millennium Falcon set fell on him, and was taken to a hospital.
According to Abrams, Ford's ankle "went to a 90-degree angle".
Production was suspended for two weeks because of Ford's injury.
Ford's son Ben said the ankle would likely need a plate and screws and that filming could be altered slightly, with the crew needing to shoot Ford from the waist up for a short time until he recovered.
A month later, Jake Steinfeld, Ford's personal trainer, said Ford was recovering rapidly.
Abrams also suffered a fractured vertebra in his back when he was trying to help lift the door after Ford's accident, but he kept this to himself for over a month.
In February 2016, it was reported that the Health and Safety Executive brought four criminal charges against Disney subsidiary Foodles Production (UK), Ltd. for alleged health and safety breaches relating to Ford's accident.
Foodles Production (UK) Ltd was subsequently fined $1.95 million in October 2016 for two health and safety breaches, after admitting the counts at an earlier hearing.
In July 2014, filming took place over three days at Skellig Michael, an island off the coast of County Kerry, Ireland, with a cast including Mark Hamill and Daisy Ridley.
Landscape shots for the planet
Takodana were shot in July in the Lake District in the northwest of England.
Production was halted for two weeks in early August 2014
so Abrams could rework shooting in Ford's absence and resumed with a fully healed Ford in mid-August.
In September, the former RAF Greenham Common military base in Berkshire was used and featured set constructions of several spaceships.
Puzzlewood in the Forest of Dean Gloucestershire England was used for some scenes.
Principal photography ended on November 3, 2014.

===
Post-production ===
Cinematographer Dan Mindel said The Force Awakens would use real locations and scale models over computer-generated imagery to make it aesthetically similar to the original Star Wars trilogy.
Rian Johnson, director of The Last Jedi, reiterated that Abrams would use little CGI and more practical, traditional special effects, saying: "I think people are coming back around to [practical effects].
It feels like there is sort of that gravity pulling us back toward it.
I think that more and more people are hitting kind of a critical mass in terms of the CG-driven action scene lending itself to a very specific type of action scene, where physics go out the window and it becomes so big so quick."
Abrams' intention in prioritizing practical special effects was to recreate the visual realism and authenticity of the original Star Wars.
To that end, the droid BB-8 was a physical prop developed by Disney Research, created by special effects artist Neal Scanlan and operated live on set with the actors.
In February 2014, Industrial Light & Magic (ILM) announced plans to open a facility in London, citing Disney's Star Wars films as a catalyst for the expansion.
ILM's Vancouver branch also worked on the special effects for the film.
Abrams supervised post-production and editing of the film at Bad Robot Productions' headquarters in Santa Monica.
In August 2015, he gave the film's estimated running time as 124 minutes.
Abrams made changes to the film's plot in the editing process to simplify the film, by removing some sequences shown in trailers: "At one point, Maz used to continue along with the characters back to the Resistance base, but we realised that she really had nothing to do there of value [...]
So we ended up leaving those things out.
"On
November 6, 2014, the film's title was announced as Star Wars: The Force Awakens.
In December 2015, Pablo Hidalgo, the creative executive at the Lucasfilm Story Group which handles all the canonical continuity for the Star Wars universe, revealed that the working title for the film was Shadow of the Empire "for the longest time".

===
Music ===
In July 2013, John Williams was confirmed to return to compose the sequel trilogy, beginning with The Force Awakens.
He began working on the film in December 2014, and by June 2015 had been through most of the film reels, working on a daily basis.
In May 2015, Williams said he would return to themes from the previous films, such as those for Luke, Leia, and Han, in ways that "there are a few that I think are important and will seem very much a part of the fabric of the piece in a positive and constructive way."
He said that working with Abrams was similar to the process he went through with Lucas in the earlier films.
Recording sessions for The Force Awakens began in June 2015 at the Sony Pictures Studios' Barbra Streisand Scoring Stage in Culver City, with William Ross conducting most of the music.
The first day of recording was June 1, 2015.
Williams attended the sessions and conducted the remainder of the recordings in Los Angeles.
The score was recorded in 12 sessions within a five-month period between June and mid-November.
The 90-piece orchestra recorded 175 minutes of music; however, Abrams reedited the film, which discarded, modified, or rerecorded the score's part for nearly an hour.
Williams' theme for Snoke was recorded by a 24-voice men's chorus.
Gustavo Dudamel conducted the opening and end title music for the film at Williams' behest.
Recording of the score was completed on November 14, 2015.
The film's soundtrack was released by Walt Disney Records on December 18, 2015.
Williams' score is more than two hours long.
Lin-Manuel Miranda and Abrams contributed music to the film's cantina scene.
Abrams met Miranda at a performance of his Broadway musical Hamilton, where Miranda jokingly offered to compose cantina music, should it be needed.
Unknown to Miranda, Williams had previously told Abrams that he did not want to compose the music for that scene, wanting to focus on the orchestral score.
Abrams then contacted Miranda, and the two collaborated on the music for the scene over a period of two months.

==
Marketing ==


===
Promotion ===
Disney backed The Force Awakens with extensive marketing campaigns.
On November 28, 2014, Lucasfilm released an 88-second teaser trailer.
It was screened in selected cinemas across the United States and Canada and in theaters worldwide in December 2014.
It was also released on YouTube and the iTunes Store, generating 58.2 million views on YouTube in its first week.
Critics compared the brief footage favorably to the production values of the original trilogy.
The Hollywood Reporter called the trailer "perfectly potent nostalgia", praising its mix of old and new.
Empire was impressed by the continuity with the first films—"the feel of classic Star Wars"—but noted the absence of Hamill, Ford, and Fisher and speculated about the significance of the new characters.
The Guardian wrote that the use of the Star Wars fanfare by John Williams reinforced brand loyalty among fans.

On December 11, 2014, Abrams and Kennedy released a series of eight mock Topps trading cards revealing the names of several characters.
On April 16, 2015, a second teaser trailer, this one lasting two minutes, was shown at the opening panel at the Star Wars Celebration in Anaheim, California.
Lucasfilm president Kathleen Kennedy said the reaction to the trailer was "staggering [...]
the entire room of almost eight thousand people just leapt to their feet and roared,
I mean I can't think of anything I've ever been to—other than a rock concert—
that felt quite like that".
The trailer was viewed over 88 million times within the first 24 hours of release.
The trailer shows many of the new characters and the first footage of Chewbacca and Han Solo.
The Huffington Post's Graham Milne wrote that the trailer "was an affirmation of something that we'd long been told was never going to happen.
This was a gift.
This was faith rewarded.
About damn time.
"Vanity
Fair was the first magazine to release an exclusive cover issue devoted to The Force Awakens.
The magazine, released on May 7, 2015, featured exclusive interviews and photos of the cast photographed by Annie Leibovitz.
At the 2015 San Diego Comic-Con International, in addition to a panel with many of the actors, a behind-the-scenes look at the film demonstrated the film's use of practical sets and effects.
It was positively received, with Nigel M. Smith of The Guardian writing: "
The featurette's angle is a strong one and connects with fans of the original trilogy in an incredibly poignant way.
It also does a sly job of teasing Fisher's new look as Leia and Simon Pegg's mysterious involvement as a rumored alien in the movie, without actually showing the actors in action.
"
Smith compared the marketing strategy for the film to that of a previous Abrams film, Super 8, saying "the promos [...] are notable for what they tease, not what they give away.
"Walt
Disney Studios and Lucasfilm presented a look at The Force Awakens at Disney's D23 Expo in August 2015.
Drew Struzan—who designed the poster artwork for the previous Star Wars films—produced a commemorative poster given to the event's attendees.
In October 2015, Lucasfilm unveiled the theatrical release poster and a third trailer.
The poster omitted Luke Skywalker and revealed a Death Star-like "orb".
The trailer debuted during the halftime break of Monday Night Football, before being released online.
The reaction to the trailer by fans on social media was "frenzied", with Lizo Mzimba of the BBC writing that "perhaps the most significant thing about the final trailer before the film's release is how little of the story it reveals."
Robbie Collin of The Daily Telegraph felt the trailer was "a perfect blend of old and new, in keeping with the old-fashioned Star Wars aesthetic".
The trailer received 128 million views in 24 hours.
16 million of the views came from its airing on Monday Night Football.
At the end of October, Air France announced a "Flight and Cinema" package, providing customers who book select flights to Paris transportation to a theater to see the film, since France was one of the first countries to release the film.
On November 23, a partnership with Google was announced, in which Google users could choose to affiliate themselves with either the Dark or Light Side, which would change the appearance of their Google websites.
Additionally, Disney teamed up with Verizon to create a virtual-reality experience for Google Cardboard.
On December 17, 2015, select theaters across the United States and Canada aired a Star Wars marathon, airing the six previous Star Wars episode films in 2D, followed by The Force Awakens in 3D.
Attendees received a special lanyard featuring exclusive marathon art.

===
Tie-in literature and merchandise ===
Disney Publishing Worldwide and Lucasfilm announced a series of at least 20 books and comics, "Journey to Star Wars:
The Force Awakens", which were released by multiple publishers starting in late 2015, prior to the film's premiere.
The series includes books by Del Rey and Disney-Lucasfilm publishers and comic books from Marvel Comics.
All titles under the program are canonical to the Star Wars universe.
Alan Dean Foster wrote a novelization of The Force Awakens which was released in e-book form on December 18.
In an effort to avoid revealing plot details before the film's release, the print release of the novelization was delayed until January 2016.
Marvel Comics published a six-issue comic book adaptation of The Force Awakens between June and November 2016.Disney Consumer Products and Lucasfilm announced that September 4, 2015 would be deemed "Force Friday" and would be the official launch of all the merchandise for The Force Awakens.
Beginning at 12:01 am, fans could buy toys, books, clothing and various other products at Disney Stores and other retailers throughout the world.
Disney and Maker Studios hosted an 18-hour live-streaming presentation on YouTube, showcasing multiple merchandise products beginning on September 3, 2015.
Among these products were a remote-controlled BB-8 developed by Sphero.
Sphero had participated in a Disney-run startup accelerator in July 2014, where they were invited into a private meeting with Disney CEO Bob Iger, in which they were shown on-set photos and imagery of BB-8 before its public unveiling.
Many retailers, such as Toys "R" Us, were unable to meet demand for Star Wars products due to the event.

===
Video games ===
The Force Awakens is the first Star Wars film to not have a direct tie-in game to accompany it.
Instead, select characters, scenes and/or locations from the film became part of other Star Wars video games:
Characters from the film were added to an update to the mobile game
Star Wars: Galaxy of Heroes, available for iOS and Android and released by Electronic Arts;
free downloadable content for Electronic Arts' Star Wars Battlefront reboot allowed players to battle on the planet Jakku; an update to the mobile game Star Wars Commander, released by Disney Mobile for iOS, Android and the Windows Store, allowed players to battle on the planet
Takodana during the Galactic Civil War era; and a condensed version of the film's plot becomes an add-on "playset" in the toys-to-life game Disney Infinity 3.0, with Finn, Rey, Poe Dameron, and Kylo Ren as playable characters.
Eventually, the film got a full Lego video game adaptation, titled Lego Star Wars:
The Force Awakens, which was released by Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment for Microsoft Windows, Nintendo 3DS, PlayStation 3, PlayStation 4, PlayStation Vita, Wii U, Xbox 360, and Xbox One on June 28, 2016.
==
Release ==


===
Theatrical ===
Star Wars:
The Force Awakens premiered in Los Angeles at the TCL Chinese Theatre, El Capitan Theatre, and Dolby Theatre on December 14, 2015.
A white tent stretched along Hollywood Boulevard from Orange Drive to Highland Avenue, covering the "massive" premiere event that hosted more than five thousand guests.
The film was released in 12 countries, including European nations (such as Italy and France), the Philippines, and Thailand on December 16; 32 countries including the United Kingdom, Mexico, and additional European, Asian, African, South American, and Oceania countries on December 17; and in the United States and Canada, Japan, Spain, and Venezuela on December 18, in 3D and IMAX 3D.
It was released in India on December 25 and in China on January 9
, 2016.In the United States and Canada, it had the widest release of December across 4,134 theaters, of which 3,300 were 3D locations, a record 392 IMAX screens (13 of which were 70mm), 451 premium large format screens, 146 D-Box locations, as well as releasing in the Dolby Vision format (high-dynamic range, Rec.
2020 color) in Dolby Cinema.
Worldwide, it was released across 940 IMAX theaters, a new record.
On December 18, 2015, the film began playing on every IMAX screen in the United States and Canada for four straight weeks up to January 14, 2016.
This made it the first film since Warner Bros.' The Hobbit trilogy to receive such a release.
The film finally shed some of its IMAX screens with the release of The Revenant (2015) and The Finest Hours (2016) in mid-January 2016.Advance ticket sales for the film began on October 19, 2015, and were in strong demand, resulting in online movie ticket sites crashing.
Vue Cinemas, the United Kingdom's third-largest theater chain, sold 45,000 tickets in 24 hours, 10,000 of which were sold in 90 minutes, a record for the theater.
In the United States, the film pre-sold a record-breaking $6.5 million worth of IMAX ticket sales on a single day.
IMAX has never previously registered more than $1 million in pre-sales on a single day.
In total, it sold over $50 million in pre-sales, breaking the record.
This number was raised to $100 million including $50–60 million in advance ticket sales by December 14.
However, not all tickets that were pre-sold were for the film's opening weekend, with
Fandango President Paul Yanover saying "people have set aside tickets for screenings in January, weeks after the big opening [...]
We have people buying Star Wars [The Force Awakens] into 2016.
It's not just an opening-weekend phenomenon.
"
Similarly, the film broke pre-sales records in the UK, Canada, and Germany.
The film is the first live-action Star Wars film not to be released theatrically by 20th Century Fox; accordingly the film is not introduced with either that company's logo, or its signature fanfare composed by Alfred Newman.
Instead, the film is the first in the series to be distributed by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures, and the film is presented with only Lucasfilm's production logo shown silently before the main titles; Disney chairman Bob Iger explained the change by saying it was "for the fans".

===
Home media ===
Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment released Star Wars:
The Force Awakens via download and Disney Movies
Anywhere on April 1, 2016, with a Blu-ray and DVD release on April 5.
The home media release contains additional footage, with eight bonus features.
As with the videodisc releases of all of the first six films in the saga, the videodisc release of The Force Awakens splits the film into fifty chapters.
A Blu-ray 3D "collector's edition" of the film was released on November 15, 2016, including all the features of the original home releases, as well as several new bonus features, including new deleted scenes and audio commentary by director J. J. Abrams.
The package includes a Blu-ray 3D, regular Blu-ray, DVD, and digital copy of the film, as well as an additional Blu-ray disc for the bonus features.
The 4K version of the film was later re-released in "The Skywalker Saga" 4K Ultra HD Blu-ray box set on March 31, 2020.

== Reception ==


===
Box office ===
Star Wars:
The Force Awakens grossed $936.7 million in the United States and Canada, and $1.132 billion in other countries for a worldwide total of $2.068 billion.
Box Office Mojo estimates that the film sold close to 110 million tickets in the United States and Canada.
The Force Awakens earned 8.6% of the total 2015 releases in the United States and Canada, second only to the 8.8% of the box office earned by Titanic in 1997.
It was the 24th film in cinematic history to gross $1 billion worldwide, standing as the fastest film to surpass the mark at the time, doing so in 12 days.
It was also the third film in history to surpass $2 billion worldwide, doing so on its 53rd day of release.
Deadline Hollywood calculated the net profit of the film to be $780.1 million, when factoring together all expenses and revenues for the film, making it the most profitable film of 2015 and the most profitable film in the last seven years.

====
Commercial analysis ====
With a production budget of $306 million, plus $175 million for marketing, printing and advertising costs, The Force Awakens was predicted to be a major box office success.
The cost of the film was subsidized by £31.6 million (US$47 million) from the UK film incentive program.
Total costs, after accounting for profit participations, production and distribution of home videos, as well as other ancillary mediums, is expected to run $423 million.
Reports in April 2015 from The Hollywood Reporter and Amboee Brand Intelligence predicted the film would earn up to $540 million worldwide for its opening, breaking the record for the biggest worldwide opening, as well as breaking the record for the biggest U.S. opening.
They believed that The Force Awakens would have the widest release ever, across 4,500 theaters in the United States and Canada.
Instead, it received a total of 4,134 theaters, and had the widest December opening.
Box office analyst Phil Contrino likened the film to Avatar (2009), which opened to $77 million in the United States and Canada and went on to earn $2.8 billion worldwide, saying The Force Awakens would earn $1 billion "without blinking" and could gross $2 billion.
In August 2015, Deadline Hollywood predicted an opening weekend of $615 million worldwide could be possible, including a $300 million opening in the United States and Canada.
Months prior to the film's release, box office analysts reported opening weekend projections were at $175–250 million.
Analysts said that the box office receipts of the film, when compared to predecessors, must be adjusted for inflation, and that the first Star Wars film made more when this adjustment is made.
It has further been observed that each of the first three films in the series was more profitable in calculating revenue against production costs.
Box office analyst Paul Dergarabedian said that while Avatar and The Force Awakens were both released on the same date of December 18, higher ticket prices in 2015 and IMAX screenings could push Star Wars "into the box office stratosphere".
By January 13, analysts concluded that it was unlikely that The Force Awakens would surpass Avatar's global gross.
While The Force Awakens was very successful in the United States and Canada, the same success was not witnessed in many overseas individual markets such as Germany, India, Latin America, and parts of Asia.
One cited reason for this is that overseas audiences do not have the same nostalgia or affinity for the film as those in the U.S.
The Star Wars franchise has traditionally lacked resonance with filmgoers in China, and marketing for The Force Awakens heavily focused on appealing to that market.
Pamela McClintock of The Hollywood Reporter stated that, for these territories, Star Wars "doesn't have the same legacy as it does in the United States and Canada and more mature markets.
It's also a faster burn, meaning it likely won't stay in theaters as long as Avatar did."
Dergarabedian said, "As in all box-office trajectories, the higher the altitude, the tougher it becomes to rack up sales at the kind of breakneck pace as in the beginning of the run.
"Nancy
Tartaglione of Deadline Hollywood argued that, if accounting for its 40/60 domestic to international split, The Force Awakens did well overseas.
Avatar did well internationally because of its novelty, the marketing campaign advertising it as showcasing the newest 3D technology that can only be fully appreciated in the theaters, and because of its extended time in overseas theaters.
While The Force Awakens had appeal with its special effects, analysts felt that it lacked the novelty factor; they also cited that its gross was stilted due to markets making way for new films sooner than was previously done, and for films not playing in overseas theaters as long as they did back when Avatar was released.
Dergarabedian stated, "No matter what, [The Force Awakens] is an absolute, all-out blockbuster without peer in terms of the sheer speed at which it has crossed all of these major box-office milestones."
Moreover, Mike Fleming of Deadline Hollywood argued that the movie was the "most valuable movie" of the year, with "the net profit to Disney was an astounding $780.11M, and the Cash on Cash Return was twice that of any other film [released in 2016], at 2.00".
====
United States and Canada ====
In the United States and Canada, The Force Awakens was released on December 18, 2015.
It made a record-breaking $57 million from Thursday night previews, of which IMAX screenings generated a record-breaking $5.7 million from 391 screens.
On its opening day, the film grossed $119.1 million, marking the biggest single- and opening-day record and the first time a film has earned more than $100 million in a single day.
Without Thursday-night grosses, the film earned the second-largest opening-day gross and a record of $247.9 million for its opening weekend.
The debut was 19% bigger than the previous record holders
The Avengers (2012) ($207 million) and Jurassic World (2015) ($208 million).
The opening weekend figure included an IMAX opening-weekend record of $30.1 million (12.65%) from 391 IMAX theaters, which nearly amounts to the $252.5 million total earned by Return of the Jedi—the second-lowest-grossing film in the series—in its original run.
2D screenings accounted for 53% of the total opening gross while 3D accounted for 47%.
RealD 3D comprised $78 million of the opening gross, setting a new record.
Revenues in the film's second weekend decreased by only 39.8% in the United States and Canada, earning $149.2 million, to remain in first place at the box office and recording the biggest second weekend of all time.
On January 2, after just 16 days of release, it became the second film (following Avatar) to gross over $700 million in the United States and Canada, and on January 6 became the highest-grossing film of all time domestically, doing so in 20 days.
On January 9, it became the first film in cinematic history to cross $800 million domestically unadjusted for inflation.
On February 5, The Force Awakens became the first film to earn over $900 million, unadjusted for inflation, in the United States and Canada.
The film fell outside of the top ten for the first time in its eleventh weekend during the weekend February 26–28, 2016, and did not achieve $1 million in ticket sales for the first time in its fourteenth weekend.

====
Other territories ====
Internationally, the film was released in over 30,000 screens.
It opened on December 16, 2015, in 12 international markets and earned $14.1 million on its opening day, debuting at first place in all of them.
It expanded in an additional 42 countries on December 17, generating $58.6 million for a two-day international total of $72.7 million, reaching first place in all 44 markets.
It grossed a total of $129.5 million in three days after adding $56.8 million on its third day, and set a new midnight record in the United Kingdom with $3.6 million.
It broke opening-day records in the United Kingdom ($14.4 million), Germany ($7.1 million), Australia ($6.8 million), Sweden ($1.7 million), Norway ($1.1 million), and in 12 other countries.
Other markets which generated large opening days were Spain ($3.5 million) and Japan ($3 million).
After the five days, The Force Awakens had a total international opening gross of $281 million from 30,000 screens, a new record for December opening and the third-biggest international opening of all time.
International markets generating opening-weekend tallies of at least $10 million were the United Kingdom ($50.6 million), Germany ($27.5 million), France ($22.5 million), Australia ($19.6 million), Japan ($13.4 million), and Russia ($12.3 million).
The film had the biggest opening of all time in 18 countries including the United Kingdom, Germany, Australia, Russia, and Sweden.
After five days, the film had a total worldwide opening record of $529 million from 74 territories, which was the biggest worldwide opening at that time, making it only the second time in cinematic history—after Jurassic World—that a film had opened to more than $500 million globally.
This included an IMAX opening record of $48 million.
Revenues from IMAX dipped slightly, generating $19 million in its second weekend, for a record total of over $70 million in 11 days.
IMAX generated $17.9 million from 276 IMAX theaters.
The film had a steeper decline in its second weekend, falling 51% to $136.9 million.
Of the notable major markets, the film had an unsuccessful opening in India where it opened third against two local blockbusters with a mere $1.51 million.
As of February 21, the largest markets outside of the United States and Canada are the United Kingdom ($180.7 million), China ($124.5 million), Germany ($109.7 million), Japan ($92.6 million), and France ($88.2 million).
On January 17, 2016, it passed the $1 billion mark overseas becoming the first film of Disney, the third film of 2015 and the fifth film overall to achieve this feat.
It topped the international box office chart for five consecutive weekends, becoming the first film since Avengers: Age of Ultron (2015) to have five straight wins, before being dethroned by The Revenant in its sixth weekend.
In Japan, it topped the box office for six straight weekends.

===
Critical response ===
Star Wars:
The Force Awakens received overwhelmingly positive reviews from critics.
The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported an approval rating of 92% with an average score of 8.20/10, based on 439 reviews.
The website's critical consensus reads, "Packed with action and populated by both familiar faces and fresh blood
, The Force Awakens successfully recalls the series' former glory while injecting it with renewed energy.
"
On Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned the film a score of 80 out of 100 based on 55 reviews, indicating "generally favorable reviews".
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A" on an A+ to F scale; women, and people under the ages of 25 and 18 gave it an "A+", while 98% of audiences gave it either an "A" or a "B".
Audiences polled by PostTrak gave the film an 88% "definite recommend" while 96% said it met or exceeded their expectations.
Robbie Collin of The Daily Telegraph said the film "sets out to shake Star Wars from its slumber, and reconnect the series with its much-pined-for past", and "it achieves this both immediately and joyously
is perhaps the single greatest relief of the movie-going year."
Peter Bradshaw of The Guardian said that it was "both a narrative progression from the earlier three films and a shrewdly affectionate next-gen reboot", and it was "ridiculous and melodramatic and sentimental, but exciting and brimming with energy and its own kind of generosity.
"
Variety's Justin Chang wrote that the film has "sufficient style, momentum, love, and care to prove irresistible to any who have ever considered themselves fans".
Richard Roeper of the Chicago Sun-Times described it as "a beautiful, thrilling, joyous, surprising, and heart-thumping adventure".
Ann Hornaday, writing for The Washington Post, thought the film had "enough novelty to create yet another cohort of die-hard fans", and the film struck "all the right chords, emotional, and narrative, to feel both familiar and exhilaratingly new."
The Charlotte Observer's Lawrence Toppman said Abrams had "pulled off a delicate balancing act, paying clever homage to the past."
Mick LaSalle of the San Francisco Chronicle gave the film his highest rating and called it "the best Star Wars sequel yet and one of the best films of 2015".
Frank Pallotta, reviewing the film for CNN Business, found it was the best Star Wars film since the original trilogy and that it "is bound to be a film experience long remembered by fans and non-fans
alike".
Certain critics found The Force Awakens derivative of the original Star Wars trilogy, some expressing their opinion that the film was essentially a remake of A New Hope.
Tom Long of The Detroit News wrote that though some may find the film too similar to the original Star Wars, it leaves "the ungainly and unneeded clumsiness of the subsequent prequels far behind", with "the energy, humor, and simplicity of direction [has] been recaptured".
The Tribune-Star called it "basically the same" as the original film but "isn't that what we all wanted anyway?"
Stephanie Zacharek of Time wrote that Abrams had delivered "everything we expect, as opposed to those nebulous wonders we didn't know we wanted".
Reviewing for Forbes, Scott Mendelson cited the film's "top-tier production values and a strong sense of scale and scope", but felt it was so much "an exercise in fan service [that] it is only due to the charisma and talent of our newbies and J. J. Abrams' undeniable skill as a visual storyteller that the Mad Libs narrative doesn't outright destroy the picture".
Brian Merchant of Motherboard said that the film "is supposed to be all about exploring the unexplored, not rehashing the well-trod", and is "one of the most unabashedly creative enterprises of the 20th century has been rendered another largely enjoyable."
RogerEbert.com's Gerardo Valero went as far as to accuse the film of plagiarizing A New Hope and resorting to nostalgia.
He felt that it "didn't [justify] a return to the universe" from not having an original story of its own to tell in the plot, characters, and musical score, negatively comparing it to George Lucas' prequel trilogy, and that some of its climactic moments felt unearned.
In an interview with journalist Charlie Rose that aired on December 24, 2015, Lucas likened his decision to sell Lucasfilm to Disney to a "divorce" and outlined the creative differences between him and the producers of The Force Awakens.
Lucas described the previous Star Wars films as his "children" and criticized the "retro feel" of The Force Awakens, saying: "I worked very hard to make [my films] completely different, with different planets, with different spaceships—you know, to make it new."
Lucas also likened Disney to "white slavers", which drew some criticism; he subsequently apologized.
In a 2019 memoir, Disney chairman Bob Iger said that George Lucas "couldn't even hide his disappointment" towards J. J. Abrams' interpretation.
According to Iger, Lucas said, "there's nothing new" after seeing the film, and that "there weren't enough visual or technical leaps forward".
Lucas preferred Rian Johnson's sequel The Last Jedi and the anthology film Rogue One (2016).
===
Accolades ===
Several awards held their nominations before the December release of The Force Awakens, making the film ineligible for the 73rd Golden Globe Awards and some other awards ceremonies.
However, the film was added to the 21st Critics' Choice Awards' slate of best picture nominees after a special vote by the board of directors, and the announcement of the 2015 American Film Institute Awards was delayed until after the release of The Force Awakens, where it was named one of Top Ten Films of the year.
The film received five Academy Award nominations at the 88th Academy Awards, including Best Original Score, Best Sound Editing, Best Sound Mixing, Best Film Editing, and Best Visual Effects.
The film garnered four nominations at the 69th British Academy Film Awards for Best Original Music, Best Sound, and Best Production Design, including two wins, one for Best Special Visual Effects and a BAFTA Rising Star Award for John Boyega.
It was nominated for Best Picture at the 2016 Critics' Choice Awards.
The film received seven Visual Effects Society Awards nominations, winning four, including Outstanding Visual Effects in an Effects Driven Feature Motion Picture.
It received the most nominations at the 21st Empire Awards, including Best Film, Best Sci-Fi/Fantasy Film, Best Director for J. J. Abrams, Best Male Newcomer for John Boyega, and Best Female Newcomer for Daisy Ridley.
The Force Awakens received 13 nominations at the 42nd Saturn Awards, where it won in eight categories, including Best Science Fiction Film, Best Writing, Best Actor for Harrison Ford, Best Supporting Actor for Adam Driver, Best Music, Best Special Effects, Best Editing, and Best Make-Up.
Daisy Ridley and John Boyega each received several nominations and accolades for their performances.
They were nominated as Best Newcomers at various critics circle and associations, including the Alliance of Women Film Journalists, and the Florida Film Critics Circle, The Force Awakens received 11 nominations at the MTV Movie Awards, including Movie of the Year, Best Female Performance for Ridley, Best Breakthrough Performance for Boyega, and Best Virtual Performance for Lupita Nyong'o and Andy Serkis.
==
Sequels ==


===
The Last Jedi ===
Rian Johnson confirmed in August 2014 that he would write and direct The Last Jedi, which was released on December 15, 2017.
Mark Hamill, Carrie Fisher, Adam Driver, Daisy Ridley, John Boyega, Oscar Isaac, Andy Serkis, Lupita Nyong'o, Domhnall Gleeson, Anthony Daniels, Gwendoline Christie, Jimmy Vee, and Joonas Suotamo reprised their roles in the film, and are joined by Kelly Marie Tran, Laura Dern, and Benicio del Toro.
===
The Rise of Skywalker ===
The Rise of Skywalker was released on December 20, 2019.
J. J. Abrams directed the film and co-wrote it with Chris Terrio.
Hamill, Fisher, Driver, Ridley, Boyega, Isaac, Daniels, Nyong'o, Suotamo, and Tran reprised their roles in the film, and are joined by Naomi Ackie, Keri Russell, and Richard E. Grant.
Billy Dee Williams returns from the original trilogy as Lando Calrissian and Ian McDiarmid returns from original and prequel trilogies as Palpatine.

==
References ==


===
Footnotes ===


===
Citations ===


===
Sources ===
Szostak, Phil (2019).
The Art of Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker.
Abrams Books.
ISBN 978-1419740381.

==
Further reading ==
Hidalgo, Pablo (2015).
Star Wars:
The Force Awakens: The Visual Dictionary.
New York: DK Publishing.
ISBN 978-1-4654-3816-4.
==
External links ==
Star Wars:
The Force Awakens at StarWars.com
Star Wars:
The Force Awakens at Lucasfilm.com
Star Wars:
The Force Awakens at IMDb
Star Wars:
The Force Awakens at AllMovie
Star Wars:
The Force Awakens title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
Star Wars:
The Force Awakens on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Star Wars:
The Force Awakens at Disney A to Z
Star Wars: The Last Jedi (also known as Star Wars: Episode VIII –
The Last Jedi) is a 2017 American epic space opera film written and directed by Rian Johnson.
Produced by Lucasfilm and distributed by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures, it is the second installment of the Star Wars sequel trilogy, following The Force Awakens (2015), and the eighth episode of the nine-part "Skywalker saga".
The film's ensemble cast includes Mark Hamill, Carrie Fisher, Adam Driver, Daisy Ridley, John Boyega, Oscar Isaac, Andy Serkis, Lupita Nyong'o, Domhnall Gleeson, Anthony Daniels, Gwendoline Christie, Kelly Marie Tran, Laura Dern, and Benicio del Toro.
The Last Jedi follows Rey as she seeks the aid of Luke Skywalker, in hopes of turning the tide for the Resistance in the fight against Kylo Ren and the First Order, while General Leia Organa, Finn, and Poe Dameron attempt to escape a First Order attack on the dwindling Resistance fleet.
The film features the first posthumous film performance by Fisher, who died in December 2016, and the film is dedicated to her.
The Last Jedi is part of a new trilogy of films announced after Disney's acquisition of Lucasfilm in October 2012.
It was produced by Lucasfilm president Kathleen Kennedy and Ram Bergman and executive produced by The Force Awakens director J. J. Abrams.
John Williams, composer for the previous episodic films, returned to compose the score.
A number of scenes were filmed at Skellig Michael in Ireland during pre-production in September 2015, but principal photography began at Pinewood Studios in England in February 2016 and wrapped that July.

The Last Jedi premiered in Los Angeles on December 9, 2017, and was released in the United States on December 15.
It grossed over $1.3 billion worldwide, becoming the highest-grossing film of 2017 and the ninth-highest-grossing film of all time during its theatrical run.
It is also the second-highest-grossing Star Wars film and turned a net profit of over $417 million.
The film received positive reviews, with praise for its ensemble cast, musical score, visual effects, action sequences, and emotional weight.
The film received four nominations at the 90th Academy Awards, including Best Original Score and Best Visual Effects, as well as two nominations at the 71st British Academy Film Awards.
The sequel, The Rise of Skywalker, was released in December 2019.

==
Plot ==
Shortly after the battle of Starkiller Base, General Leia Organa is leading the Resistance forces in evacuating their base when the First Order fleet arrives.
Against Leia's orders, Poe Dameron leads a costly counterattack that destroys a First Order dreadnought.
The remaining Resistance escapes into hyperspace, but the First Order uses a device to track them, and attacks again.
Kylo Ren hesitates to fire on the lead Resistance ship after sensing his mother Leia's presence on board, but his wingmen destroy the bridge, killing most of the Resistance's leaders.
Leia is dragged into space but survives by using the Force.
While Leia recovers, Vice-Admiral Holdo assumes command of the Resistance.
Running low on fuel, the remaining fleet is pursued by the First Order.

On Ahch-To, Rey attempts to recruit Luke Skywalker to the Resistance.
Under self-imposed exile, Luke refuses to help and says that the Jedi should end.
After encouragement from R2-D2, he agrees to give Rey three lessons in the ways of the Force.
Rey and Kylo begin communicating through the Force, which puzzles them both.
Kylo tells Rey that Luke feared his power; Luke confesses that he momentarily contemplated killing Kylo upon sensing that Snoke was corrupting him, which prompted Kylo to destroy Luke's new Jedi Order.
Convinced that Kylo can be redeemed, Rey leaves Ahch-To.
Luke prepares to burn the Jedi library but hesitates.
The spirit of Luke's master Yoda appears and destroys the library by summoning a bolt of lightning.
He encourages Luke to learn from his failure.

Meanwhile, Poe entrusts Finn, mechanic Rose, and BB-8 with a secret mission to disable the First Order's tracking device.
Maz Kanata directs them to the casino town of Canto Bight, where they meet the hacker DJ.
Pursued by the local security, they escape Canto Bight with the help of stablehand children and racing animals they set free.
Finn, Rose, and DJ infiltrate Snoke's flagship but are captured by Captain Phasma.
Kylo brings Rey to Snoke, who reveals that he connected their minds to discover Luke's whereabouts.

Holdo plans to evacuate the remaining members of the Resistance using small transport vessels.
Believing her plan cowardly and futile, Poe leads a mutiny.
A recovered Leia stuns Poe with a blaster and proceeds with the evacuation.
Holdo remains aboard the ship as a decoy to mislead Snoke's fleet as the others flee to an abandoned base on Crait.
DJ buys his freedom by revealing the Resistance's plan to General Hux, and the First Order fleet begins firing on the evacuation transports, destroying many.

Ordered to kill Rey, Kylo instead kills Snoke and defeats his Praetorian Guard with her help.
Rey hopes that Kylo has abandoned the dark side, but he instead asks her to rule the galaxy with him.
Refusing, she battles him for control of Luke's lightsaber, bisecting the weapon.
Holdo sacrifices herself by slicing through Snoke's flagship at lightspeed, crippling the First Order fleet.
Rey escapes the destruction while Kylo declares himself Supreme Leader.
BB-8 frees Finn and Rose; they defeat Phasma and join the survivors on Crait.
When the First Order arrives, Poe, Finn, and Rose attack with obsolete speeders.
Rey and Chewbacca draw TIE fighters away in the Millennium Falcon, while Rose stops Finn from sacrificing himself.
The First Order penetrates the Resistance fortress using a siege cannon.

Luke appears and confronts the First Order, allowing the surviving Resistance to escape.
Kylo orders the First Order's forces to fire on Luke, but they fail to harm him.
He then engages Luke in a lightsaber duel; upon striking Luke, Kylo realizes that Luke is not physically present, but projecting his image through the Force.
Rey helps the remaining Resistance escape on the Falcon.
Exhausted, Luke dies peacefully on Ahch-To, becoming one with the Force.
Rey and Leia sense his death, and Leia tells Rey that the Resistance can rise again.

At Canto Bight, the stablehands recount the story of Luke Skywalker; afterward, one of them moves a broom with the Force and gazes into space.

== Cast ==
Mark Hamill as Luke Skywalker, a powerful Jedi Master who has been in self-imposed exile on the planet Ahch-To.
Hamill voices Dobbu Scay, named after the film's editor, Bob Ducsay.
On Canto Bight, the character mistakes BB-8 for a slot machine.

Carrie Fisher as General Leia Organa, twin sister to Luke, former princess of Alderaan, and a leading general in the Resistance.

Adam Driver as Kylo Ren, Supreme Leader Snoke's disciple, who is strong with the Force.
He is the son of Han Solo and Leia Organa, and Luke's nephew.

Daisy Ridley as Rey, a highly Force-sensitive scavenger from the desert planet Jakku who joined the Resistance and goes to find Luke.

John Boyega as Finn, a former stormtrooper of the First Order who defected to the Resistance.

Oscar Isaac as Poe Dameron, a high-ranking X-wing fighter pilot in the Resistance.

Andy Serkis as Supreme Leader Snoke, the leader of the First Order and Kylo Ren's master.

Lupita Nyong'o as Maz Kanata, a pirate and ally of the Resistance.

Domhnall Gleeson as General Hux, the former head of the First Order's Starkiller Base.

Anthony Daniels as C-3PO, a humanoid protocol droid in the service of Leia Organa.

Gwendoline Christie as Captain Phasma, the commander of the First Order's stormtroopers.

Kelly Marie Tran as Rose Tico, a member of the Resistance who works in maintenance.

Laura Dern as Vice-Admiral Amilyn Holdo, an officer in the Resistance.

Benicio del Toro as DJ, an underworld codebreaker.
Frank Oz returns as Yoda, the deceased former Jedi Master and Luke's wise mentor, who appears as a Force spirit.
Joonas Suotamo appears as Chewbacca, taking over the role from Peter Mayhew after previously serving as his body double in The Force Awakens.
Mayhew, who suffered from chronic knee and back pain, and was credited as "Chewbacca consultant".
Billie Lourd, Mike Quinn, and Timothy D. Rose reprise their roles as Lieutenant Connix, Nien Nunb, and
Admiral Ackbar, respectively; with Tom Kane voicing Ackbar.
Amanda Lawrence appears as Commander D'Acy, and Mark Lewis Jones and Adrian Edmondson play Captains Canady and Peavey, respectively.
BB-8 is controlled by puppeteers Dave Chapman and Brian Herring, with initial voice work by Ben Schwartz and final sound effects voiced by Bill Hader modulated through a synthesizer.
Jimmy Vee portrays R2-D2, taking over the role from Kenny Baker, who died in August 2016.
Veronica Ngo portrays Rose's sister Paige Tico, a Resistance gunner who sacrifices her life to destroy a First Order dreadnought.
Justin Theroux plays the master codebreaker, while Lily Cole plays his companion.
Joseph Gordon-Levitt has a voice cameo as Slowen Lo, and Warwick Davis plays Wodibin.
Rogue One (2016)
director Gareth Edwards has a cameo appearance as a Resistance Soldier, with Edgar Wright and Joe Cornish also cameo in the film.
Hermione Corfield appears as Tallissan "Tallie" Lintra, a Resistance A-Wing pilot and squadron leader, and Noah Segan and Jamie Christopher appear as Resistance pilots Starck and Tubbs.
Hugh Skinner cameos as a Resistance Officer; while Hamill's children, Griffin, Nathan, and Chelsea, cameo as Resistance soldiers.
Prince William, Duke of Cambridge; Prince Harry, Duke of Sussex; and Gary Barlow have cameo appearances as stormtroopers, and Tom Hardy also has an appearance as a stormtrooper, but his cameo was dropped from the final cut.

==
Production ==


===
Development ===
In October 2012, Star Wars creator George Lucas sold his production company Lucasfilm to The Walt Disney Company.
Disney announced a new trilogy of Star Wars films.
J. J. Abrams was named director of the first episode in the trilogy, The Force Awakens, in January 2013.
In June 2014, director Rian Johnson was reported to be in talks to write and direct its sequel, Episode VIII, and to write a treatment for the third film, Episode IX, with Ram Bergman producing both films.
Johnson confirmed in August that he would direct Episode VIII.
In September, filmmaker Terry Gilliam asked Johnson about what it felt like to take over something made famous by another filmmaker.
Johnson responded:

I'm just starting into it, but so far, honestly, it's the most fun I've ever had writing.
It's just joyous.
But also for me personally, I grew up not just watching those movies but playing with those toys, so as a little kid, the first movies I was making in my head were set in this world.
A big part of it is that direct connection, almost like an automatic jacking back into childhood in a weird way.
But I don't know, ask me again in a few years and we'll be able to talk about that.

In January 2015, Disney CEO Bob Iger stated that Episode VIII would be released in 2017.
In December, Lucasfilm president Kathleen Kennedy said that the film had not been mapped out and that Abrams was collaborating with Johnson, who would in turn work with (then)
Episode IX director Colin Trevorrow to ensure a smooth transition.
Additionally, Abrams served as an executive producer along with Jason McGatlin and Tom Karnowski.
In January 2017, Lucasfilm announced the title for Episode VIII as Star Wars: The Last Jedi.

===
Writing ===
The Last Jedi story begins immediately after The Force Awakens.
Johnson had his story group watch films such as Twelve O'Clock High (1949),
The Bridge on the River Kwai (1957), Gunga Din (1939), Three Outlaw Samurai (1964), Sahara (1943), and Letter Never Sent (1960) for inspiration while developing ideas.
He felt it was difficult to work on the film while The Force Awakens was being finished.
Johnson wrote the scene with the mirrored versions of Rey to symbolise her search for identity; when she asks for a vision of her parents, she sees only herself.
Rey learns that her parents were "nobodies" as it would be "the hardest thing" she and the audience could hear; Johnson likened the scene to Luke Skywalker learning that Darth Vader is his father in The Empire Strikes
Back (1980).
During production, Hamill expressed disagreement with the direction of his character, Luke, feeling his character's disillusioned state was at odds with his character.
Hamill later said he regretted making his initial misgivings public and compared his disagreements to his clashes with George Lucas during the filming of Return of the Jedi (1983).

===
Casting ===
In September 2015, Disney shortlisted the female cast members to Gina Rodriguez, Tatiana Maslany, and Olivia Cooke.
That same month, Benicio del Toro confirmed his involvement in the film, but denied that he was playing a villain, and Mark Hamill was also confirmed.
Joaquin Phoenix was also courted to portray the role of DJ, but would end up passing on the offer.
In October 2015, Gugu Mbatha-Raw was rumored to have been cast in the film.
In November, Kennedy announced at the London premiere of The Force Awakens that the entire cast would return for Episode VIII, along with "a handful" of new cast members.
In February 2016, at the start of filming, it was confirmed that Laura Dern and Kelly Marie Tran had been cast in undisclosed roles.
In April 2017, at Star Wars Celebration Orlando, Lucasfilm announced that Tran would play Resistance maintenance worker Rose Tico, which Johnson described as the film's largest new role.
To keep Frank Oz's return as Yoda a secret, producers excluded Oz's name in the billing for the film's pre-release marketing and ensured that Oz stayed on set during filming.

===
Filming ===
Second unit photography began during pre-production at Skellig Michael in Ireland on September 14, 2015, due to the difficulties of filming at that location during other seasons.
It would have lasted five days, but filming was canceled for the first day due to poor weather and rough conditions.
In September 2015, del Toro revealed that principal photography would begin in March 2016.
The production began work on the 007 Stage at Pinewood Studios on November 15, 2015.
Rick Heinrichs served as production designer.
In January 2016, production of Episode VIII was delayed until February due to script rewrites.
Filming was in danger of being delayed further due to an upcoming strike between the Producers Alliance for Cinema and Television and the Broadcasting, Entertainment, Cinematograph and Theatre Union.
On February 10, 2016, Disney CEO Bob Iger confirmed that principal photography had begun under the working title Space Bear.
Additional filming took place in Dubrovnik, Croatia from March 9 to 16, as well as in Ireland in
May. Malin Head in County Donegal and a mountain headland, Ceann Sibeal in County Kerry, served as additional filming locations.
To increase the scenes' intimacy Driver and Ridley were both present when filming Kylo and Rey's Force visions.
Location filming for the battle scenes on the planet
Crait took place at the Salar de Uyuni salt flats in Bolivia.
Additional filming took place in Mexico.
Principal photography wrapped on July 22, 2016, though as of early September, Nyong'o had not filmed her scenes.
In February 2017, it was announced that sequences from the film were shot in IMAX.
Production designer Rick Heinrichs said the original script called for 160 sets, double what might be expected, but that Johnson did some "trimming and cutting".
Ultimately, 125 sets were created on 14 sound stages at Pinewood Studios.
According to creature designer Neal Scanlan, The Last Jedi has more practical effects than any Star Wars film, with 180 to 200 creatures created with practical effects, some cut from the final edit.
For Yoda's appearance in the film as a Force ghost, the character was created using puppetry, as was done in the original Star Wars trilogy (as opposed to computer-generated imagery, which was used to create Yoda in most of the prequel trilogy).

===
Music ===
In July 2013, Kennedy confirmed at Star Wars Celebration Europe that John Williams would return to score the Star Wars sequel trilogy.
Williams confirmed his assignment for The Last Jedi at a Tanglewood concert in August 2016, stating he would begin recording the score "off and on" in December 2016 until March or April 2017.
On February 21, 2017, it was confirmed that recording was underway, with both Williams and William Ross conducting the sessions.
In lieu of a traditional spotting session with Johnson, Williams was provided a temp track of music from his previous film scores as a reference for scoring The Last Jedi.
The official soundtrack album was released by Walt Disney Records on December 15, 2017.

==
Release ==


===
Theatrical ===
The film had its world premiere at the Shrine Auditorium in Los Angeles on December 9, 2017, and was released in the United States on December 15.
The film was originally scheduled to be released in the United States on May 26; however, it was pushed back to December to avoid competition with Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales (2017).
===
Marketing ===
On September 19, 2017, Australia Post released a set of stamp packs.
On October 12, Royal Mail released a set of eight promotional postage stamps designed by Malcolm Tween.
Several tie-in books were released on the same day as the film's release, including The Last Jedi: The Visual Dictionary, and various children's reading and activity books.
Related novelizations included the prequel book Cobalt Squadron, and the Canto Bight, a collection of novellas about the Canto Bight Casino.
As with The Force Awakens, there is no official tie-in game for The Last Jedi, in favor of integrating content from the film into other Star Wars video games, including Star Wars Battlefront II, which introduced various content from the film, during the game's first "season".

===
Home media ===
Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment released Star Wars:
The Last Jedi digitally in HD and 4K via digital download and Movies
Anywhere on March 13, 2018, with an Ultra HD Blu-ray, Blu-ray, and DVD physical release on March 27.
The 4K version of the film was later re-released in "The Skywalker Saga" 4K Ultra HD Blu-ray box set on March 31, 2020.

== Reception ==


===
Box office ===
Star Wars:
The Last Jedi  grossed $620.2 million in the United States and Canada, and $712.5 million in other territories, for a worldwide total of $1.333 billion.
It had a worldwide opening of $450.8 million, the eighth-biggest of all time, including $40.6 million that was attributed to IMAX screenings, the second biggest for IMAX.
It was estimated that the film would need to gross $800 million worldwide to break even; Deadline Hollywood calculated the net profit of the film to be $417.5 million, when factoring together all expenses and revenues, making it the most profitable release of 2017.

====
United States and Canada ====
Pre-sale tickets went on sale in the United States on October 9, 2017, and as with The Force Awakens and Rogue One, ticket service sites such as Fandango had their servers crash due to heavy traffic and demand.
In the United States and Canada, industry tracking had The Last Jedi grossing around $200 million from 4,232 theaters in its opening weekend.
The film made $45 million from Thursday night previews, the second-highest amount ever (behind The Force Awakens' $57 million).
It went on to make $104.8 million on its first day (including previews), and $220 million over the weekend, both the second-highest amounts of all time.
The opening weekend figure included an IMAX opening-weekend of $25 million, the biggest IMAX opening of the year, and the second biggest ever behind The Force Awakens.
After dropping by 76% on its second Friday, the worst Friday-to-Friday drop in the series, the film fell by a total of 67% in its second weekend, grossing $71.7 million.
It was the largest second-weekend drop of the series, although it remained atop the box office.
It made $52.4 million in its third weekend, again topping the box office.
It also brought its domestic total to $517.1 million, overtaking the Disney film Beauty and the Beast (2017) as the highest of 2017.
It grossed $23.6 million and was surpassed the following weekend by Jumanji:
Welcome to the Jungle (2017) (which was in its third week) and Insidious:
The Last Key (2018).
====
Other countries ====
In its first two days of release the film made $60.8 million from 48 markets.
The top countries were the United Kingdom ($10.2 million), Germany ($6.1 million), France ($6 million), Australia ($5.6 million), and Brazil ($2.5 million).
By the end of the weekend, the film made $230 million outside the United States and Canada.
All-time opening weekend records were set in various countries, including France, Germany, Spain, United Kingdom, and Finland.
On its second weekend, it grossed $76.1 million outside the United States and Canada and became the fourth-highest-grossing film of the year in Europe.
As of January 21, the largest markets outside of the United States and Canada are the United Kingdom ($109.3 million), Germany ($79.8 million), France ($63.5 million), Japan ($60.8 million), and Australia ($43.5 million).The film had a $28.7 million opening weekend in China.
A week after its debut, China's movie exhibitors dropped the film's showtimes by 90%.
The film grossed $910,000 in its third weekend, dropping to ninth place at the Chinese box office, overshadowed by new releases including Bollywood film Secret Superstar (2017), Hollywood films
Ferdinand (2017)
and Wonder (2017), and
Chinese film
A Better Tomorrow 2018.
The Last Jedi grossed $42.5 million in China.

===
Critical response ===
The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported an approval rating of 90% with an average score of 8.1/10, based on 476 reviews.
The website's critical consensus reads, "
Star Wars:
The Last Jedi honors the saga's rich legacy while adding some surprising twists — and delivering all the emotion-rich action fans could hope for."
Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned the film a score of 84 out of 100 based on 56 critics, indicating "universal acclaim".
Metacritic analysis found the film was the 25nd-most mentioned film on "best of the year" film rankings and the 22nd-most mentioned on "best of the decade" film rankings.
Matt Zoller Seitz of RogerEbert.com gave the film four stars out of four, praising the surprises and risks that it took, writing that "The movie works equally well as an earnest adventure full of passionate heroes and villains and a meditation on sequels and franchise properties", in which the film "includes multiple debates over whether one should replicate or reject the stories and symbols of the past.
"
Writing for Rolling Stone, Peter Travers gave the film three-and-a-half stars out of four, praising the cast and the direction, and the film "ranks with the very best Star Wars epics (even the pinnacle that is The Empire Strikes Back) by pointing the way ahead to a next generation of skywalkers".
Richard Roeper of the Chicago Sun-Times gave the film three-and-a-half stars out of four, praising the action sequences and humor, said that the film "doesn't pack quite the same emotional punch [as The Force Awakens] and it lags a bit in the second half,
[but] this is still a worthy chapter in the Star Wars franchise", and containing a few callbacks of "previous characters and iconic moments.
"Will Gompertz, arts editor of BBC News, gave the film four stars out of five, writing "Rian Johnson [...] has not ruined your Christmas with a turkey.
His gift to you is a cracker, a blockbuster movie packed with invention, wit, and action galore.
"
The unpredictability of the plot was appreciated by reviewers such as Alex Leadbeater of Screen Rant, who commented specifically that the death of Snoke was "the best movie twist in years".
Creator of the franchise George Lucas, who was not involved with the film's production, described The Last Jedi as "beautifully made" shortly after its release.
His reaction to Star Wars:
The Force Awakens was generally more negative.
Conversely, Richard Brody of The New Yorker wrote that the film "comes off as a work that's ironed out, flattened down, appallingly purified."
Kate Taylor of The Globe and Mail gave the film two stars out of four, saying the film suffered from too many new additions, and writing the film that "seeks to uphold a giant cultural legacy, this unfolding trilogy struggles to maintain a balance that often seems just out of reach."
Owen Gleiberman of Variety criticized the film for being too derivative of the past movies by saying that "it's now repeating things that have already been repeated", with such attempts by having a "mood and darkening design of The Empire Strikes Back", making the sequel trilogy becoming "an official monument to nostalgia."
===
Audience reception ===
Audience reception measured by scientific polling methods was highly positive.
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A" on an A+ to F scale, and those at PostTrak gave the film an 89% overall positive score, a 79% "definite recommend", and a rare five-star rating.
User-generated scores at Rotten Tomatoes and Metacritic were more negative.
At Rotten Tomatoes, 42% of users rated the film 2.6 stars or higher out of 5, while at Metacritic, the average user score is 4.2 out of 10.
Audience scores on such sites require only registration and do not ensure that contributing voters have seen the film.
Several reviewers speculated that coordinated vote brigading from internet groups and bots contributed to the low scores.
Quartz noted that some new accounts gave negative ratings to both The Last Jedi and Thor: Ragnarok (2017), while Bleeding Cool stated that reviews for Thor: Ragnarok had tapered off but then "skyrocketed".
In response to tampering claims shortly after the film's release, a Fandango executive stated that Rotten Tomatoes detected no unusual activity on The Last Jedi aside from a noticeable "uptick in the number of written user reviews".
In 2019, a Rotten Tomatoes spokesperson said the film had been "seriously targeted" by a review-bombing campaign.
Reviewers characterized The Last Jedi as divisive among audiences.
Emily VanDerWerff of Vox found that dissatisfied fans saw the film as too progressive, disliked its humor, plot, or character arcs, or felt betrayed that it ignored fan theories.
Other reviewers made similar observations.
Particularly divisive was the reveal that Rey's parents are insignificant; many fans had expected her to be Luke's daughter or to share a lineage with another character from the original trilogy.
There was also sentiment that Snoke's character was underdeveloped and that Luke's actions contradicted his previous heroic portrayal.
Reviewers stated that fan theories were held so strongly among some viewers that it was difficult for them to accept different stories, but that other viewers appreciated the film's action, tone, and deviation from Star Wars tradition.

===
Accolades ===


==
Sequel ==
The Rise of Skywalker, the final installment of the sequel trilogy, was released on December 20, 2019.
Colin Trevorrow was expected to direct the film, but on September 5, 2017, Lucasfilm announced that he had stepped down.
A week later, Lucasfilm announced that J. J. Abrams would return to direct the film and co-write it with Chris Terrio.

== Notes ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Star Wars:
The Last Jedi at StarWars.com
Star Wars:
The Last Jedi at Lucasfilm.com
Star Wars: The Last Jedi at IMDb
Star Wars:
The Last Jedi at AllMovie
Star Wars:
The Last Jedi on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Star Wars: The Last Jedi at Disney A to Z
Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker (also known as Star Wars: Episode IX –
The Rise of Skywalker) is a 2019 American epic space opera film produced, co-written, and directed by J. J. Abrams.
Produced by Lucasfilm and Abrams' production company Bad Robot Productions, and distributed by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures, it is the third installment of the Star Wars sequel trilogy, following The Force Awakens (2015) and The Last Jedi (2017), and the final episode of the nine-part "Skywalker saga".
The film's ensemble cast includes Carrie Fisher, Mark Hamill, Adam Driver, Daisy Ridley, John Boyega, Oscar Isaac, Anthony Daniels, Naomi Ackie, Domhnall Gleeson, Richard E. Grant, Lupita Nyong'o, Keri Russell, Joonas Suotamo, Kelly Marie Tran, Ian McDiarmid, and Billy Dee Williams.
The Rise of Skywalker follows Rey, Finn, and Poe Dameron as they lead the Resistance's final stand against Supreme Leader Kylo Ren and the First Order, who are aided by the return of the deceased Galactic Emperor, Palpatine.

Following initial reports that The Last Jedi director Rian Johnson would write the script for Episode IX, in August 2015, Colin Trevorrow was hired to direct and to write a script with his collaborator Derek Connolly; both ultimately retain story credit with Abrams and Chris Terrio.
In September 2017, Trevorrow left the project following creative differences with producer Kathleen Kennedy, and Abrams returned as director.
John Williams, composer for the previous episodic films, returned to compose the score–his final score for the franchise.
Principal photography began in August 2018 at Pinewood Studios in England and wrapped in February 2019, with post-production completed in November 2019.
With an estimated budget of $275 million, it is one of the most expensive films ever made.

The film premiered in Los Angeles on December 16, 2019, and was released in the United States on December 20.
It received mixed reviews from critics, who praised the acting, action sequences, musical score, and visual effects, but criticized the story, pacing, and its perceived departures from the plot and themes of The Last Jedi.
The film grossed over $1.074 billion worldwide, becoming the seventh-highest-grossing film of 2019; although the film was the lowest-grossing installment of the trilogy, and turned an estimated net profit of $300 million.
The film received three nominations at the 92nd Academy Awards (Best Original Score, Best Visual Effects, and Best Sound Editing) as well as three at the 73rd British Academy Film Awards (also Best Special Visual Effects, Best Original Music, and Best Sound).
==
Plot ==
Following a threat of revenge by the revived Emperor Palpatine, Kylo Ren obtains a Sith Wayfinder, leading him to the uncharted planet Exegol.
There, he finds Palpatine, who reveals that he created Snoke as a puppet to control the First Order and lure Kylo to the dark side.
Palpatine unveils the Final Order—a secret armada of Star Destroyers—and tells Kylo to find and kill Rey, who is continuing her Jedi training under Resistance leader Leia Organa.
Finn and Poe Dameron deliver intelligence from a spy that Palpatine is on Exegol; Rey has learned from Luke Skywalker's notes that a Sith Wayfinder can lead them there.
Rey, Finn, Poe, Chewbacca, BB-8, and C-3PO depart in the Millennium Falcon to Pasaana, where a clue to a Wayfinder is hidden.

Kylo initiates a Force bond with Rey to discover her location; he travels to Pasaana with his warrior subordinates, the Knights of Ren.
With the help of Lando Calrissian, Rey and her friends find the clue—a dagger inscribed with Sith text, which C-3PO's programming forbids him from interpreting—and the remains of a Jedi hunter named Ochi and his ship.
Rey senses Kylo nearby, and faces him.
The First Order captures the Falcon, Chewbacca, and the dagger; attempting to save Chewbacca, Rey accidentally destroys a First Order transport with Force lightning.
Believing Chewbacca to be dead, the group escapes on Ochi's ship.

The group travels to Kijimi, where a droidsmith extracts the Sith text from C-3PO's memory, revealing coordinates to a Wayfinder.
Rey senses Chewbacca is alive, and the group mounts a rescue mission to Kylo's Star Destroyer.
Rey recovers the dagger and has visions of Ochi killing her parents with it.
Kylo informs her that she is Palpatine's granddaughter; the Sith Lord had ordered Ochi to recover Rey as a child, but her parents hid her on Jakku to protect her.
General Hux saves Poe, Finn, and Chewbacca from execution, revealing himself as the spy.
He permits the group to escape on the Falcon, but is discovered and killed by Allegiant General Pryde.
The group flies the Falcon to the Wayfinder's coordinates on a moon in the Endor system.

Rey retrieves the Wayfinder from the remains of the second Death Star, but she is met by Kylo, who destroys the Wayfinder and duels her.
In a dying act, Leia calls to Kylo through the Force, distracting him as Rey impales him.
Sensing Leia's death, Rey heals Kylo and takes his ship to exile herself on Ahch-To.
There, Luke's Force spirit encourages Rey to face Palpatine and gives her Leia's lightsaber.
Rey leaves for Exegol in Luke's X-wing fighter, using the Wayfinder from Kylo's ship.
Meanwhile, Kylo converses with a memory of his father, Han Solo; he throws away his lightsaber and reclaims his identity as Ben Solo.
Sensing Leia's death and Ben's redemption
, Palpatine sends one of his superlaser-equipped Star Destroyers to destroy Kijimi as a show of force.

Rey transmits her coordinates to R2-D2, allowing the Resistance—now led by Poe and Finn—to follow her to Exegol.
There, she confronts Palpatine; he demands that she kill him for his spirit to pass into her.
Lando brings reinforcements from across the galaxy to join the battle.
Ben overpowers the Knights of Ren and joins Rey, but Palpatine drains their power to rejuvenate himself.
He incapacitates Ben and attacks the Resistance fleet with Force lightning.
Weakened, Rey hears the voices of past Jedi, who lend her their strength.
Palpatine attacks her with lightning, but Rey deflects it using Luke and Leia's lightsabers, killing Palpatine before dying herself.
Ben uses the Force to revive her at the cost of his own life; Rey kisses Ben before he dies.
The Resistance defeats Palpatine's armada, while people across the galaxy rise up against the First Order.
The Resistance returns to their base to celebrate.

After the celebration, Rey visits Luke's abandoned childhood home on Tatooine and buries his and Leia's lightsabers.
A passerby asks her name; as the spirits of Luke and Leia watch, she replies, "Rey Skywalker."
== Cast ==
Carrie Fisher as Leia Organa, the Force-sensitive leading general of the Resistance, mother to Ben Solo, Luke Skywalker's twin sister, and Anakin Skywalker's daughter.
Fisher, who died in late 2016, appears through the use of repurposed unreleased footage from The Force Awakens.
As a result of her death, Fisher was not present in most of the film's marketing materials or merchandise.

Mark Hamill as Luke Skywalker, the last Jedi Master and maternal uncle of Kylo Ren, who became one with the Force in The Last Jedi.

Adam Driver as Ben Solo / Kylo Ren, the Supreme Leader of the First Order.
He is the son of Leia Organa and Han Solo, the nephew of Luke Skywalker, and grandson of Anakin Skywalker.

Daisy Ridley as Rey, a former scavenger from Jakku, member of the Resistance, granddaughter of Palpatine, and the next Jedi Master.
Cailey Fleming and Josefine Irrera Jackson as young Rey
John Boyega as Finn, a member of the Resistance and a former stormtrooper (FN-2187) who defected from the First Order.

Oscar Isaac as Poe Dameron, a high-ranking X-wing fighter pilot and commander of the Resistance who later inherits the rank of General from Leia.

Anthony Daniels as C-3PO, a humanoid protocol droid in the service of General Leia Organa.

Naomi Ackie as Jannah, a former Stormtrooper of the First Order (TZ-1719) living on the planet Kef Bir, who aids the Resistance.

Domhnall Gleeson as General Hux, the First Order's third in-command.

Richard E. Grant as Allegiant General Pryde, a high-ranking general in the First Order, who previously served in the Galactic Empire.

Lupita Nyong'o as Maz Kanata, a former space pirate and ally of the Resistance.

Keri Russell as Zorii Bliss, an old acquaintance of Poe's from Kijimi.

Joonas Suotamo as Chewbacca, a Wookiee and first mate of the Millennium Falcon.

Kelly Marie Tran as Rose Tico, a mechanic in the Resistance and friend of Finn.

Ian McDiarmid as Emperor Palpatine, the resurrected Dark Lord of the Sith and Rey's paternal grandfather.

Billy Dee Williams as Lando Calrissian, a veteran of the Rebel Alliance, a former owner of the Millennium Falcon, and an old friend of Chewbacca.
Billie Lourd, Greg Grunberg, and Harrison Ford reprise their roles as Lieutenant Kaydel Ko Connix, Temmin "Snap" Wexley, and Han Solo, respectively.
Additionally, Dominic Monaghan portrays Resistance trooper Beaumont Kin, Shirley Henderson voices Babu Frik, and Nick Kellington portrays Klaud via capture performance.
Hassan Taj and Lee Towersey perform the role of R2-D2, while Dave Chapman and Brian Herring return as the puppeteers of BB-8, and director J. J. Abrams also provides the voice for D-O. Martin Wilde, Anton Simpson-Tidy, Lukaz Leong, Tom Rodgers, Joe Kennard, and Ashley Beck appear as the Knights of Ren.
Amanda Lawrence reprises her role as Commander Larma D’Acy, while Vinette Robinson plays her wife, Pilot Wrobie Tyce.
Jodie Comer and Billy Howle briefly appear as Rey's parents, while Tom Wilton and screenwriter Chris Terrio briefly appear as the performer and voice for Aftab Ackbar, the son of Admiral Ackbar, respectively; and Mike Quinn and Kipsang Rotich return as the performer and voice of Nien Nunb, respectively.
Denis Lawson and Warwick Davis briefly reprise their roles as Wedge Antilles, a veteran of the Rebel Alliance; and Wicket W. Warrick, now the leader of the Ewoks, respectively.
Composer John Williams cameos as Oma Tres, a Kijimi bartender, Kevin Smith cameos as a Kijimi inhabitant, and Abrams' frequent composer collaborator Michael Giacchino cameos as a Sith Trooper, while Lin-Manuel Miranda and Jeff Garlin both cameo as human and alien Resistance troopers, respectively.
Actors making reprisal vocal cameos include: James Earl Jones as Darth Vader, Andy Serkis as Snoke, and the voices of several past Jedi, including Ewan McGregor and Alec Guinness as Obi-Wan Kenobi (the latter via digitally altered archive audio), Hayden Christensen as Anakin Skywalker, Ashley Eckstein as Ahsoka Tano, Freddie Prinze Jr. as Kanan Jarrus, Olivia d'Abo as Luminara Unduli, Frank Oz as Yoda, Liam Neeson as Qui-Gon Jinn, Jennifer Hale as Aayla Secura, Samuel L. Jackson as Mace Windu, and Angelique Perrin as Adi Gallia.
Ed Sheeran, Karl Urban, Dhani Harrison, Nigel Godrich, J. D. Dillard, and Dave Hearn all cameo as stormtroopers.

==
Production ==


===
Development ===
In October 2012, Star Wars creator George Lucas sold his production company Lucasfilm to The Walt Disney Company.
Disney subsequently announced the Star Wars sequel trilogy.
In June 2014, it was announced that Rian Johnson, writer and director of The Last Jedi, would write a story treatment for Episode IX.
However, Johnson later stated that he was not involved in writing the film.
In August 2015, Colin Trevorrow was announced as the director of the film; he was to write the script with frequent collaborator Derek Connolly.

=== Pre-production ===

In February 2016, Disney chief executive officer Bob Iger confirmed that pre-production on Episode IX had begun.
Carrie Fisher died in December 2016.
Prior to the release of the film, Carrie Fisher's brother Todd Fisher, who planned her character
General Leia Organa to appear in the film before her death, revealed that “she was going to be the big payoff in the final film” and “she was going to be the last Jedi, so to speak.
”In
late April 2017, Disney announced that the film would be released on May 24, 2019.
A month later, filming was expected to begin in January 2018, but this was later pushed back to August.

In August 2017, it was announced that Jack Thorne would rewrite the script.
On September 5, 2017, Lucasfilm stated that Trevorrow had left the production following creative differences.
The Hollywood Reporter reported that his working relationship with Kathleen Kennedy had become unmanageable after failing to deliver a satisfactory script, despite writing several drafts.
Johnson was rumored as the top choice to replace Trevorrow as director, but stated "it was never in the plan for me to direct Episode IX."The next day, it was announced that J. J. Abrams, the director of The Force Awakens, would return to direct the film, and that the film's release date would be moved to December 20, 2019.
The story team met with George Lucas before writing the new script to discuss the nature of the Force.
Abrams co-wrote the script with Chris Terrio, though Trevorrow and Connolly retain story credits.
The story was rewritten to some extent before filming was completed.
The film was produced by Abrams' company Bad Robot Productions, Kathleen Kennedy, and Michelle Rejwan.
According to Terrio, the film's script had to include certain narrative beats provided by Kennedy and Rejwan, including the redemption of the character Kylo Ren.
Before filming, Episode IX was initially given the working title Black Diamond, which was then changed to TrIXie in 2018, so that the roman numeral "IX" would be included in the working title.
The film's title, The Rise of Skywalker, was announced at April 2019's Star Wars Celebration in Chicago.

===
Casting ===
Carrie Fisher, who played Leia Organa, died on December 27, 2016.
Variety and Reuters reported that she had been planned for a key role in Episode IX.
In January 2017, Lucasfilm stated that there were no plans to digitally generate Fisher's performance as they had for Rogue One (2016).
The following April, Fisher's brother Todd revealed that Fisher's daughter, Billie Lourd, had granted Disney the rights to use recent footage of Fisher.
However, a week later, Kathleen Kennedy stated that Fisher would not appear in the film.
In July 2018, J. J. Abrams announced that unused footage of Fisher from The Force Awakens would be used to help complete the story.
In flashback scenes, digital de-aging was used for the appearance of Luke and Leia through the use of facial shots of both characters from the Empire Strikes Back, and Return of the Jedi respectively.

In July 2018, Keri Russell was in talks to play a part with some "action-heavy fight scenes", and it was confirmed that Billy Dee Williams would return as Lando Calrissian, onscreen for the first time since 1983's Return of the Jedi—marking one of the longest intervals between portrayals of a character by the same actor in American film history.
At the end of July, Russell was confirmed to have been cast, and there was an announcement of returning and additional new cast members.
In late August, Deadline Hollywood announced that Dominic Monaghan and Matt Smith had been cast in unspecified roles, but Smith later denied his involvement.
Greg Grunberg reprises his role as Temmin "Snap" Wexley.
At Star Wars Celebration in April 2019, it was revealed via the film's teaser trailer that Ian McDiarmid would return to portray Palpatine.
Since the event was held after principal photography wrapped, Abrams was thrilled that news of McDiarmid on the set never leaked.
Kathleen Kennedy said they decided to reveal Palpatine's return ahead of the film's release because of the characters playing a larger role in the story, having them differentiated from Baby Yoda, the character from The Mandalorian.

===
Filming ===
Principal photography began on August 1, 2018, at Pinewood Studios in Buckinghamshire, England.

Filming also took place in Wadi Rum, Jordan.

Oscar Isaac stated that Abrams was allowing more improvised acting than in the previous two films.
Due to the tight schedule, some editing took place on set.
Principal photography wrapped on February 15, 2019.
Footage from the film was shown at The Walt Disney Company's annual shareholders meeting on March 7, 2019.
Two weeks of reshoots took place at Pinewood involving Hamill, Ridley, and Isaac in July 2019.
Another round of reshoots took place at Bad Robot Productions between late September and mid-October.

===
Post-production ===
The visual effects were created by Industrial Light & Magic and supervised by Roger Guyett.
The film finished post-production on November 25, 2019.
After Boyega accidentally left a copy of the script in his hotel room, it was listed on eBay for around £65.
===
Music ===
In January 2018, it was confirmed that John Williams would return to compose and conduct The Rise of Skywalker.
The next month, Williams announced that it would be the last Star Wars film for which he would compose the score.
In August 2019, it was revealed that Williams had written about 35 of an expected 135 minutes of music for the film, which according to Williams' brother Don, would incorporate all of the major themes of the Skywalker saga.
Scoring began in July 2019 with Williams and William Ross conducting and orchestrating the sessions over the course of six months.
The official soundtrack album was released by Walt Disney Records on December 20, 2019.

==
Marketing ==


===
Promotion ===
Despite staying silent about many details of the film, Abrams expressed his hopes that fans and general audiences would be "satisfied".
He headed a panel dedicated to the film on April 12, 2019, during Star Wars Celebration in Chicago, where the film's title was revealed.
Additionally, the story events of the Disneyland themed area Star Wars: Galaxy's Edge precede the film, including the Millennium Falcon:
Smugglers Run motion simulator, which features Chewbacca.
On August 24, a new poster and "sizzle reel" was released at D23; the latter was released to the public two days later.
The footage includes a montage of the Skywalker saga so far, as well as several new shots from the film.

===
Tie-in literature and merchandise ===
A publishing campaign titled "Journey to Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker" was announced on May 4, 2019.
It includes the novel Resistance Reborn, set between The Last Jedi and The Rise of Skywalker, and various other titles.
From December 18, 2019 to March 11, 2020, a prequel graphic novel titled The Rise of Kylo Ren, telling the story of how Ben Solo became Kylo Ren and elaborating upon the character's backstory, was published by Marvel Comics, written by Charles Soule and illustrated by Will Sliney.
The official novelization of The Rise of Skywalker is by Rae Carson:
hardcover and audiobook versions were released on March 19, 2020.
The novel details Palpatine's return in more depth
: he transferred his consciousness into a clone body following his death in Return of the Jedi, and his "son", Rey's father, was a failed clone of Palpatine.
The junior novel and corresponding audiobook are by Michael Kogge and was released on April 21, 2020.
Additionally, a five-issue Marvel Comics adaptation written by Jody Houser and illustrated by Will Sliney was originally planned to debut in mid-2020, but this was later cancelled, making the film the first in the franchise not to receive a comic adaptation.

===
Video games ===
The video game Star Wars Battlefront II (2017) released a free level set on Ajan Kloss.
In December 2019, the video game Fortnite Battle Royale released several cosmetics featuring character skins for Rey, Finn, a Sith Trooper, Kylo Ren, and Zorii Bliss along with a TIE fighter glider, a Millennium Falcon glider (which was given to players for free from the Winterfest Event), four emotes, and two free banners.
On December 14, Fortnite's publisher Epic Games released a preview of the film on an in-game theater screen as a live event.
At the end of the event, a message from Palpatine (the one mentioned in the film's opening crawl) was heard.
To coincide with the release of the film, a trailer for the forthcoming video game, Lego Star Wars: The Skywalker Saga was released on the same day.

==
Release ==


===
Theatrical ===
The film was originally planned to be released in the United States on May 24, 2019, before being pushed back to December 20.
It had its world premiere in Los Angeles on December 16.
Unlike most studio films, Disney reportedly did not hold test screenings for The Rise of Skywalker, instead only showing it to Abrams' friends and family, as well as a terminally-ill fan.
Before the film's release, Disney issued a warning that the scenes with strobe-like flashing lights may trigger photosensitive migraines and seizures during some of those scenes.

===
Home media ===
The Rise of Skywalker was scheduled to be released on Digital HD on March 17, 2020, but was released four days early in the light of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Its DVD, Blu-ray, and 4K Ultra HD release was followed on March 31 by Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment.
The 4K version of the film was also released in "The Skywalker Saga" Ultra HD Blu-ray box set that same date.
It was released on Disney+
on May 4, which is reportedly two months ahead of its previously scheduled release date.

== Reception ==


===
Box office ===
Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker grossed $515.2 million in the United States and Canada, and $558.9 million in other territories, for a worldwide total of $1.074 billion.
Deadline Hollywood calculated the net profit of the film to be $300 million, when factoring together all expenses and revenues.
Pre-sale tickets went on sale on October 21, 2019 and the film sold more tickets in their first hour of availability on Atom Tickets than the previous record-holder for ticket sales, Avengers: Endgame (2019).
It became Atom Tickets' second-best first-day seller of all time behind Endgame, selling more than twice the number of tickets as The Last Jedi sold in that same timeframe, while Fandango reported it outsold all previous Star Wars films.
Box office tracking had The Rise of Skywalker grossing around $205 million in its opening weekend, though some firms predicted a debut closer to $175 million.
The film made $89.6 million on its first day, including $40 million from Thursday night previews, the sixth-highest opening day of all time.
It went on to debut to $177.3 million, and it was also noted that Saturday (which saw a 47% drop from Friday's gross) was the busiest shopping day of the year, likely affecting ticket sales
; however, Deadline Hollywood did write that "we can't ignore" the less than stellar audience exit scores, which could affect the film's legs moving forward.
The film made $32 million on Christmas Day, the second-best total ever for the holiday after The Force Awakens' $49.3 million in 2015.
It went on to have a five-day total of $138.8 million, including $76 million for the weekend.
In its third weekend the film made $34.5 million, remaining in first, before being dethroned in its fourth weekend by newcomer 1917 (2019).Worldwide the film was projected to gross around $450 million in its opening weekend, including $250 million from 52 international territories.
It made $59.1 million from its first day of international release in 46 countries.
The biggest markets were the United Kingdom ($8.3 million), Germany ($7.2 million), France ($5.3 million), and Australia ($4.3 million).
In China, the film made $1.6 million (RMB11.6 million) through its first day.
It went on to open to $198 million from overseas countries and $373.5 million worldwide, coming in below projections and 47% lower than The Last Jedi's total.
Its biggest opening totals remained the UK ($26.8 million), Germany ($21.8 million), France ($15.2 million), Japan ($14.6 million), Australia ($12.6 million), and China ($12.1 million).

===
Critical response ===
The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported an approval rating of 51% with an average score of 6.1/10, based on 500 reviews.
The website's critical consensus reads, "The Rise of Skywalker suffers from a frustrating lack of imagination, but concludes this beloved saga with fan-focused devotion.
"
As of January 2020, the film is the lowest-rated live-action film of the Star Wars series.
Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned the film a score of 53 out of 100 based on 61 critics, indicating "mixed or average reviews".
Richard Roeper, reviewing for the Chicago Sun-Times, gave the film three stars out of four, writing that it "rarely comes close to touching greatness, but it's a solid, visually dazzling and warmhearted victory [for] quality filmmaking."
The A.V. Club's A. A. Dowd gave the film a C+, stating that the film "is so freighted with obligation that it almost groans under the weight, flashing a weak smile as it vaguely approximates the appearance of a zippy good time."
Michael Phillips for Chicago Tribune wrote that the film "does the job.
It wraps up the trio of trilogies begun in 1977 in a confident, soothingly predictable way, doing all that is cinematically possible to avoid [upsetting the] tradition-minded quadrants of the Star Wars fan base.
"Mick
LaSalle of the San Francisco Chronicle described the film as "a disappointment" and wrote, "For all the movie's faults, it's likely that most people will consider The Rise of Skywalker and accept the trade: Sit through a
so-so 110 minutes to get to a strong half hour.
"
Owen Gleiberman of Variety called the film "the most elegant, emotionally rounded, and gratifying Star Wars adventure since the glory days of Star Wars (1977) and The Empire Strikes Back (1980) [...]
but given the last eight films, the bar isn't that high.
"
The BBC's Nicholas Barber praised the film's acting and wrote, "The Rise of Skywalker has been lovingly crafted by a host of talented people, and yet the best they can do is pay tribute to everything he did several decades ago.
"Scott
Mendelson for Forbes described the film as "possibly worse" compared to the previous Skywalker saga films while ending the main saga and "denying this new trilogy its artistic reason for existence", and criticized the film for retconning The Last Jedi and its plot; saying that "patronizing reversals in the name of mollifying the fans who merely want to be reminded of the first three movies."
Justin Chang of the Los Angeles Times described the film as "a Last Jedi corrective", which is "more accurate way to describe it" and is "an epic failure of nerve"; saying that "feels more like a retreat, a return to a zone of emotional and thematic safety from a filmmaker with a gift for packaging nostalgia as subversion.
"
Writing for The New Yorker, Richard Brody states that the film's faults "are those of the franchise over all"; as the film's director "J. J. Abrams is mainly a distiller and a magnifier and brings virtually no originality to it", using the controls of Michael Bay.
Whereas Asian actress Kelly Marie Tran had around ten minutes of screen-time in The Last Jedi, she appears for about a minute in The Rise of Skywalker.
The reduced role was interpreted by some critics as a concession to fans who disliked her character; Tran had been a target of online harassment following the release of The Last Jedi.
People involved on the previous film defended her, with some claiming some of the attackers were racist, and body shamers.
Critics said she was "sidelined" into a minor character, and commented on how she was written out "without any explanation" and her minor role was considered by one critic to be "one of the film's biggest disappointments".
In regards to the criticism towards her reduced screen-time, screenwriter Chris Terrio said it was due to the difficulty of including the deceased Carrie Fisher archive footage in scenes planned to feature both characters.

===
Audience response ===
According to CinemaScore, American audiences gave the film an average grade of "B+" on an A+ to F scale, the lowest among the live-action films.
On PostTrak, audiences gave the film an average four stars out of five, with 70% saying they would definitely recommend it; parents and children under 12 years old (who made up 16% of opening night attendance) gave it a full five stars out of five.
Men (who made up 67% of the audience) gave the film an overall positive score of 80% while women (33%) gave it an 84%.
RelishMix, which tracks social media posts and online presence, "noticed a divided reaction to Skywalker online, though it leaned slightly positive".
Months prior to the film's trailer release, it was review bombed on Rotten Tomatoes to the point where the "Want to See" percentage went down as far as 5% within a day, with many of the reviews focusing on lingering negativity towards The Last Jedi.
Similar bombing with Captain Marvel (2019) caused Rotten Tomatoes to completely remove the "Want to See"  feature after temporarily changing it to a number.
===
Accolades ===
== Notes ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker at StarWars.com
Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker at Lucasfilm.com
Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker at IMDb
Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker at AllMovie
Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker at Disney A to Z
Rogue One: A Star Wars Story (or simply Rogue One) is a 2016 American epic space opera film directed by Gareth Edwards.
The screenplay by Chris Weitz and Tony Gilroy is from a story by John Knoll and Gary Whitta.
It was produced by Lucasfilm and distributed by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures.
It is the first installment of the Star Wars anthology series and an immediate prequel to Star Wars:
Episode IV – A New Hope (1977).
The main cast consists of Felicity Jones, Diego Luna, Ben Mendelsohn, Donnie Yen, Mads Mikkelsen, Alan Tudyk, Riz Ahmed, Jiang Wen, and Forest Whitaker.
Set a week before A New Hope, the plot follows a group of rebels who band together to steal plans of the Death Star, the ultimate weapon of the Galactic Empire.
The film also details the Rebel Alliance's first effective victory against the Empire, first referenced in A New Hope's opening crawl.
Based on an idea first pitched by Knoll ten years before it entered development, the film was made to be different in tone and style from the traditional Star Wars films, omitting the customary opening crawl and transitional screen wipes.
Principal photography on the film began at Pinewood Studios, Buckinghamshire, in early August 2015 and wrapped in February 2016.
The film then went through extensive reshoots directed by Gilroy in mid-2016.
With an estimated production budget of at least $200 million, it is one of the most expensive films ever made.

The film premiered in Los Angeles on December 10, 2016, and was released in the United States on December 16.
It received positive reviews from critics, with praise for its acting, story, visuals, musical score, and dark tone, but criticism for its pacing, characters, and digital recreations of Peter Cushing and Carrie Fisher.
It grossed over $1 billion worldwide, making it the 20th-highest-grossing film of all time and the second-highest-grossing film of 2016 during its theatrical run.
It received two Oscar nominations for Best Sound Mixing and Best Visual Effects.

==
Plot ==
Research scientist Galen Erso and his family are in hiding on the planet Lah'mu when Imperial weapons developer Orson Krennic arrives to press him into completing the Death Star, a space station-based superweapon capable of destroying entire planets.
Galen's wife, Lyra, is killed in the confrontation while their daughter, Jyn, escapes and is rescued by rebel extremist Saw Gerrera.

Fifteen years later, cargo pilot Bodhi Rook defects from the Empire, taking a holographic message recorded by Galen to Gerrera on the desert moon Jedha.
Rebel Alliance intelligence officer Cassian Andor learns of Rook's defection and the Death Star from an informant.
Jyn is freed from an Imperial labor camp at Wobani and is brought to the Rebel leader Mon Mothma, who convinces her to find and rescue Galen so the Alliance can learn more about the Death Star.
Cassian is covertly ordered to kill Galen rather than extract him.

Jyn, Cassian, and reprogrammed Imperial droid K-2SO travel to Jedha, where the Empire is removing kyber crystals from the holy city to power the Death Star; Gerrera and his partisans are engaged in an armed insurgency against them.
With the aid of blind spiritual warrior Chirrut Îmwe and his mercenary friend Baze Malbus, Jyn makes contact with Gerrera, who has been holding Rook captive.
Gerrera shows her the message, in which Galen reveals he has secretly built a vulnerability into the Death Star and directs them to retrieve the schematics from an Imperial data bank on the planet
Scarif.

On the Death Star, Krennic orders a low-powered test shot which destroys Jedha's capital.
Jyn and her group take Rook and flee the moon, but Gerrera remains to die with the city.
Grand Moff Tarkin congratulates Krennic before using Rook's defection and security leak as a pretext to take control of the project.
Rook leads the group to Galen's Imperial research facility on the planet Eadu, where Cassian chooses not to kill Galen.
Jyn makes her presence known moments before Rebel bombers attack the facility.
Galen is mortally wounded by the bombers and dies in his daughter's arms, before she escapes with her group on board a stolen Imperial cargo shuttle.
Krennic is summoned by Darth Vader to answer for the Death Star's attack on Jedha City.
Krennic seeks his support for an audience with the Emperor, but Vader instead Force-chokes him and orders him to ensure no further breaches occur.

Jyn proposes a plan to steal the Death Star schematics using the Rebel fleet but fails to gain approval from the Alliance Council, who feel victory against the Empire is now impossible.
Frustrated at their inaction, Jyn's group lead a small squad of Rebel volunteers to raid the databank themselves.
Arriving at Scarif on the stolen Imperial ship, which Rook dubs "Rogue One", a disguised Jyn and Cassian enter the base with K-2SO while the other Rebels attack the Imperial garrison as a diversion.
The Alliance learns of the raid from intercepted Imperial communications and deploys their fleet in support, revealing their full might to the Empire.
K-2SO
sacrifices himself so Jyn and Cassian can retrieve the data.
Îmwe is killed after activating the master switch to allow communication with the Rebel fleet, and Malbus is killed in action shortly afterward.
Rook is killed by a grenade after informing the Rebel fleet that it must deactivate the planetary shield to allow the transmission of the schematics.
The Rebel commander, Admiral Raddus, uses a Hammerhead corvette to destroy two Star Destroyers, and the wreckage crashes atop the shield generator, punching a hole in the shield.
Jyn and Cassian obtain the schematics, but they are ambushed by Krennic, who is eventually shot and wounded by Cassian.
Jyn transmits the schematics to the Rebel command ship.
The Death Star enters orbit above Scarif, where Tarkin uses another low-power shot to destroy the compromised base, killing Krennic, Cassian, and Jyn, along with all remaining ground Imperial and Rebel forces.

The Rebel fleet prepares to jump to hyperspace, but many of the fleet's ships are intercepted by Vader's arriving Star Destroyer.
Vader boards the Rebel command ship and kills many of the rebel troops in an attempt to regain the schematics, but a small starship escapes with the plans on board.
Aboard the fleeing ship, Princess Leia declares that the schematics will provide hope for the Rebellion.

== Cast ==
Felicity Jones as Jyn Erso, a young renegade woman who is detained for her crimes against the Empire until she is freed by the Rebel Alliance.
She has used many aliases during her life such as Lianna Hallik, Tanith Pontha, and Kestrel Dawn, while her father affectionately calls her "Stardust".

Beau Gadsdon as 8-year-old Jyn
Dolly Gadsdon as 4-year-old Jyn
Diego Luna as Cassian Andor, a Rebel captain and intelligence officer.

Ben Mendelsohn as Orson Krennic, the director of advanced weapons research for the Imperial military.

Donnie Yen as Chirrut Îmwe, a blind warrior who believes in the Force.
He is said to be one of the Guardians of the Whills.

Mads Mikkelsen as Galen Erso, Jyn's father and a research scientist.

Alan Tudyk as K-2SO, a former Imperial enforcer droid who was reprogrammed by Cassian Andor to serve the Rebellion.

Riz Ahmed as Bodhi Rook, a former Imperial cargo pilot who defects to the rebels under the influence of Galen Erso.

Jiang Wen as Baze Malbus, a longtime companion of Chirrut Îmwe and one-time devoted Guardian of the Whills, now a Rebel warrior and mercenary.

Forest Whitaker as Saw Gerrera, a veteran of the Clone Wars and a friend of the Erso family who had mentored Jyn in her later childhood years.
Jimmy Smits, Genevieve O'Reilly, Anthony Daniels, and Jimmy Vee reprise their roles from previous films as Bail Organa, Mon Mothma, C-3PO, and R2-D2, respectively; Vee is uncredited for his role.
James Earl Jones also reprises his role from previous films as the voice of Darth Vader, who is physically portrayed by Spencer Wilding during the meeting with Krennic and aboard the Star Destroyer, and by Daniel Naprous for the end scene.
Grand Moff Tarkin and Princess Leia Organa are played by Guy Henry and Ingvild Deila, respectively, with the digital likenesses of Peter Cushing and Carrie Fisher superimposed.
Henry also provides the voice for Tarkin, while archival audio of Fisher is used for Leia.
Angus MacInnes and Drewe Henley are featured as Gold Leader Dutch Vander and Red Leader Garven Dreis, respectively, via unused footage from A New Hope; MacInnes returned to record new dialogue for Vander, while new dialogue for the deceased Henley was assembled from archival material.
David Ankrum, who voiced Wedge Antilles in A New Hope, reprises his role in a vocal cameo.
Ian McElhinney, Michael Smiley, Andy de la Tour, and Tim Beckmann play General Jan Dodonna, Dr. Evazan, General Hurst Romodi, and Captain Raymus Antilles, respectively.
Warwick Davis plays Weeteef Cyubee, a member of Saw Gerrera's Partisans.
Dave Filoni reprises his role as C1-10P from Star Wars Rebels.
Stephen Stanton voices
Admiral Raddus, while Paul Kasey appears in costume as the alien character on-screen.

Additionally, Alistair Petrie plays General Davits Draven, Ben Daniels plays General Antoc Merrick, and Valene Kane plays Lyra Erso, Jyn's mother.
Jonathan Aris, Fares Fares, and
Sharon Duncan-Brewster appear as Senators Nower Jebel, Vasp Vaspar, and Tynnra Pamlo, respectively.
Simon Farnaby plays a member of Blue Squadron.
Jordan Stephens appears as Rebel Alliance member Corporal Tonc.
Nick Kellington plays Bistan, the door gunner on a U-wing during the battle on Scarif.
Ian Whyte plays Moroff, a member of Saw Gerrera's Partisans.
Daniel Mays appears as Tivik.
Rian Johnson and Ram Bergman, director and producer of Star Wars: The Last Jedi, respectively, cameo as two Death Star technicians.

==
Production ==


===
Development ===
Rogue One is the first film in the Star Wars anthology series, a series of standalone spin-off films in the Star Wars franchise.
John Knoll, visual effects supervisor for the Star Wars prequel trilogy, pitched the idea as an episode of the unproduced series Star Wars: Underworld 10 years before the film's development; after the Disney acquisition he felt as if he had to pitch it again or forever wonder "what might've happened if I had".
In May 2014, Disney announced Gareth Edwards would direct the film and Gary Whitta would write the script.
That October, cinematographer Greig Fraser revealed that he would work on the film.
In January 2015, it was revealed Whitta had completed his work on the script, and would no longer be with the project.
Simon Kinberg was considered as a replacement.
Later that month, it was announced Chris Weitz had signed to write the script for the film.
In March 2015, the title was announced.
Edwards stated the style of the film would be similar to that of a war film, stating, "It's the reality of war.
Good guys are bad.
Bad guys are good.
It's complicated, layered; a very rich scenario in which to set a movie."
Assuming Disney would not allow a dark ending, Edwards had the main characters surviving in the original version of the script, but the producers opted for a more tragic ending and never filmed the original version.
In May 2016, reports emerged the film would undergo five weeks of reshoots with Tony Gilroy writing additional scenes, as well as acting as a second-unit director under Edwards.
With input from Edwards, Gilroy oversaw the edit and additional photography of the film which tackled several issues, including the ending.
In August, Gilroy was given screenplay credit alongside Weitz and was paid $5 million for his work on the film.
Additionally, Christopher McQuarrie, Scott Z. Burns, and Michael Arndt all contributed to the script at various stages in development.
In July 2016, discussing whether the film would feature an opening crawl, Kathleen Kennedy said, "we're in the midst of talking about it, but I don't think these [anthology] films will have an opening crawl."
Edwards explained "The idea is this film is supposed to be different than the saga films," and that "This film is born out of a crawl. ...
There's this feeling that if we did a crawl, then it'll create another movie."
In November 2016, Kennedy confirmed the film would not feature an opening crawl, instead beginning in "a way that is traditional, with just the title.
"At
the 2016 Star Wars Celebration, Edwards said the title had three meanings: "a military sign", referring to the Red Squadron from A New Hope; "the 'rogue' one" of the franchise, given it
is the first film to not be part of the main saga; and a description of Jyn Erso's personality.

===
Casting ===
In January 2015, The Hollywood Reporter stated numerous actresses, including Tatiana Maslany, Rooney Mara, and Felicity Jones were being tested for the film's lead.
In February 2015, it was announced Jones was in final talks to star in the film, while Aaron Paul and Édgar Ramírez were being eyed for the male lead role.
In March 2015, Jones was officially cast.
In March 2015, Deadline Hollywood reported a rumor that Ben Mendelsohn was being considered for a lead role.
The next month, TheWrap reported that Sam Claflin was being eyed for a role, while Riz Ahmed was in negotiations to join the film.
In May, Mendelsohn, Ahmed, and Diego Luna were added to the cast of the film, in the lead roles.
Forest Whitaker was added to the cast in June 2015.
In July 2015, Jonathan Aris was cast to play Senator Jebel.
Genevieve O'Reilly was cast as Mon Mothma, reprising her role from Star Wars:
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith.
James Earl Jones was confirmed to return as the voice of Darth Vader in June 2016.

===
Filming ===
Principal photography on the film began at Elstree Studios in Hertfordshire on August 8, 2015.
Much of the other photography was completed at or near Pinewood Studios at Buckinghamshire, UK where huge sets were built to complement scenes filmed elsewhere in the world.
The film was shot using Ultra Panavision 70 lenses with Arri Alexa 65 large format digital 6K cameras.

Filming locations were used around the world.
In Iceland, the crew shot in Reynisfjara, and around the mountains of Hjörleifshöfði and Hafursey at Mýrdalssandur, which were used to represent Lah'mu and Eadu.
Also used were the Krafla area with its volcanic crater and around Lake Mývatn's rock formations.
The islands of Gan and Baresdhoo of the Laamu Atoll in the Maldives, as well as the former RAF Bovingdon airfield, were used to represent Scarif.
Wadi Rum in Jordan was used to represent Jedha.
Pymmes Park in Edmonton
, London was also used for location filming, and scenes set on Yavin 4 were filmed at Cardington Airfield.
Gareth Edwards selected the London Underground's Canary Wharf station as a location for a chase scene in an Imperial base; the location shoot took place between midnight and 4 am, when the station was closed to the public.
The film spent an estimated total of $265 million and received a $45.5 million subsidy from the United Kingdom's film incentive program.
===
Post-production ===
On February 11, 2016, Disney executives stated the film was "virtually completed".
Several weeks of pre-scheduled reshoots began in June 2016.
Tony Gilroy, who was an uncredited writer on the film at the time, was hired to direct the reshoots and rework aspects of the film, earning him a screenwriting credit.
It was created solely using digital tools.
Industrial Light & Magic (ILM) produced the film's visual effects.
ILM used CGI and digitally altered archive footage to insert Peter Cushing's likeness over the body of actor Guy Henry.
Lucasfilm secured permission from the late actor's estate to include him in the film.
The team reportedly searched through countless hours of Cushing footage in order to find suitable reference material, and Henry provided the motion capture and voice work.
A digital model of Cushing was mapped over Henry's performance like a digital body mask.
Cushing's mannerisms, including his manner of speaking, were studied by the creative team and applied to the digital Tarkin model.
Cushing's estate was heavily involved with the creation and had input right down to "small, subtle adjustments".
A similar process was used in the portrayal of Princess Leia; Carrie Fisher's appearance as Leia in the first film was superimposed over Norwegian actress Ingvild Deila's face and archival audio of Fisher saying "Hope" was used to voice the character.
Post-production wrapped on November 28, 2016.
== Music ==
In March 2015, it was reported that Alexandre Desplat, who had worked with Edwards on Godzilla, would compose the score for Rogue One.
Despite rumors that a contract had not been initially set in place by Lucasfilm, Desplat confirmed in an April 2016 interview that he would serve as composer for the film.
Concerning the film, Desplat commented that "[Edwards and I] had a great partnership on Godzilla, and I can't wait to be starting with him.
It will be in a few weeks from now, and it is very exciting and frightening at the same time because it's such a legendary project.
To be called to come after John Williams ...
it's a great challenge for me."
But then, in September 2016, it was announced that Michael Giacchino would be replacing Desplat as composer, after the film's reshoots altered the post-production schedule, and reportedly left Desplat no longer available.
Giacchino only had four and a half weeks to compose the music for the film, beginning almost immediately after finishing production on Doctor Strange.
In an interview with Entertainment Weekly in November 2016, Giacchino stated: "It is a film that is in many ways a really great World War II movie, and I loved that about it.
But it also has this huge, huge heart at the center of it, and that was the one thing I just didn't want to discount.
Yes, it's an action movie, and it's a Star Wars film, and it has all the things that you would come to expect and love about that,
but I didn't want to forget that it was also an incredibly emotional movie as well.
That was what really pulled me in.
"Giacchino
incorporated John Williams' themes from previous films into the score.
The official soundtrack was released by Walt Disney Records on December 16, 2016.All music was composed by Giacchino except where noted.
Giacchino, who has a history of using track titles that contain wordplay, shared his alternate list in the liner notes of the soundtrack release.
These names are listed in the notes.

==
Release ==


===
Theatrical ===
Rogue One premiered at the Pantages Theatre in Los Angeles on December 10, 2016.
The film was released in certain European countries on December 14, 2016, and was released in North America on December 16, with China getting the film on January 6, 2017.
===
Marketing ===
Promotion of Rogue One was initially delayed by the release of the film Mission:
Impossible – Rogue Nation in July 2015, because the titles are similar.
Paramount Pictures registered and cleared the title with the Motion Picture Association of America in January 2015, well before Disney announced the title of its forthcoming Star Wars spinoff.
Disney and Lucasfilm had to reach an agreement with Paramount over promotion in order to avoid any confusion in the public mind.
Disney agreed to embargo promotion on Rogue One until after mid-2015, with the exception of a very short teaser which was screened at Star Wars Celebration in Anaheim that year.
A teaser trailer for Rogue One, released by Lucasfilm on April 7, 2016, was praised by reviewers for its portrayal of strong female characters.
The Daily Telegraph described Jyn Erso's character as "a roguish, Han Solo-style heroine", calling the film "progressive", while noting its painstaking faithfulness to the production design style of the original Star Wars trilogy.
The Hollywood Reporter also noted the visual nods to the original trilogy, and examined the film's possible narrative direction, considering that the outcome is to some extent already revealed in the opening crawl of A New Hope.
The Atlantic writer David Sims stated that the trailer brought "back some memorable pieces of architecture, from the lumbering AT-AT walkers to the Death Star itself, not to mention the glorious 70s costuming of Star Wars."
He added that the trailer has "the look", blending the old with the new.
The trailer was viewed close to 30 million times in its first 29 hours, at a rate of 800,000 views per hour, from Facebook and YouTube, which is 200,000 views shy of what the first teaser trailer for Star Wars: The Force Awakens was receiving in November 2014.In June 2016, Rogue One was promoted at the Star Wars Celebration Europe III event in London.
During the event, a new official poster was unveiled, which depicts a battle taking place on the tropical planet Scarif, with the Death Star looming large in a blue sky, above which is printed the tagline "A Rebellion Built on Hope".
A second teaser trailer was also unveiled, screened exclusively for the Celebration audience, and not streamed online.
This new trailer was reviewed favorably by critics; The Daily Telegraph noted that the trailer revealed new locations such as the planets Jedha and Scarif, and that its most significant revelation came in the final seconds of the teaser, with the appearance of Darth Vader, reflected in a computer screen and accompanied by his classic breathing sound effect.
Variety also hailed the Vader reveal, and noted that the emphasis of the production was much more on the kinetic depiction of large battle sequences and full-on warfare, comparing it to Francis Ford Coppola's 1979 Vietnam War epic Apocalypse Now.
A showreel was also shown during the event, which featured footage from the film, cut with behind-the-scenes shots and interviews with the director and cast members.
The second trailer was shown publicly during a broadcast of the 2016 Summer Olympics and received positive responses; Wired stated that the trailer was "littered with nostalgic throwbacks to the original trilogy", while Rolling Stone described the CGI landscape shots seen in the footage as "eye-poppingly gorgeous".
A further trailer released in October 2016 prompted The Hollywood Reporter to comment that the newly revealed footage looked like "a trailer to a different movie than the one advertised earlier", remarking that Jyn Erso appeared to be portrayed as a more vulnerable character, and highlighting the appearance of Galen Erso as a protective father figure.
Vanity Fair also commented on the emphasis given to Jyn's relationship with her father, suggesting that Rogue One was drawing on "the Star Wars franchise's greatest natural resource: daddy issues".
The film's publicity tour began in Mexico on November 23, 2016.In Asia, Disney focused marketing efforts on Donnie Yen, where his individual poster is used for marketing in territories including Japan, Singapore, Indonesia, Thailand, Hong Kong, China, Vietnam, and Malaysia.
The official Star Wars Facebook page of the respective Asian countries also featured clips and videos of Donnie Yen speaking various languages, greeting fans and telling them to support the film.
In addition, Disney also released various versions of international trailers with more footage of Yen.

===
Home media ===
Rogue One was released on Digital HD on March 24, 2017, and by Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment on Blu-ray, Blu-ray 3D, and DVD on April 4, 2017.

== Reception ==


===
Box office ===
Rogue One grossed $532.2 million in the United States and Canada and $523.8 million in other countries for a worldwide total of $1.056 billion.
On January 21, 2017, the film became Disney's fourth film of 2016 to earn $1 billion in ticket sales, joining Captain America:
Civil War, Zootopia, and Finding Dory.
It is the second-highest-grossing film of 2016 and the 20th-highest-grossing film of all time, all unadjusted for inflation.
It is also the third Star Wars film to gross over $1 billion worldwide, following The Phantom Menace and The Force Awakens.
In the United States, it was the top-grossing film of 2016.
Deadline Hollywood calculated the net profit of the film to be $319.6 million, when factoring together all expenses and revenues for the film, making it the third-most profitable release of 2016.In late November 2016, box office projections for the United States and Canada had the film grossing $100–150 million during its opening weekend.
Disney chairman Bob Iger noted that Disney and Lucasfilm did not expect Rogue One to match The Force Awakens' total gross of $2.1 billion, nor its $248 million opening.
Pre-sale tickets for the film went on sale at 12:01 AM EST on November 28, 2016.
Within 10 minutes, ticket sale sites such as Fandango crashed, much like they had in advance of The Force Awakens the year prior.
In its first 24 hours, the film had the second-highest number of pre-sale tickets ever sold, behind only The Force Awakens.
Worldwide, the film was expected to gross $280–350 million in its opening weekend.
In the United States, the film made $29 million from its Thursday night previews, making it the highest-grossing Thursday opening of 2016.
On Friday, the film earned $71.1 million, earning the 12th highest-grossing opening day of all time.
The film grossed $46.3 million on Saturday, securing a total of $155.1 million in its opening weekend, the third-biggest debut of 2016.
It topped the box office once again in its second weekend, grossing $64 million (down 58.7%) over the three day weekend, and $96.1 million over the four day weekend.
On Christmas Day, it grossed $25.9 million.
It finished first at the box office again in its third weekend, grossing $49.6 million (-22.5%) over the three-day weekend and $65.5 million over the four-day weekend, becoming the seventh film of 2016 to top the box office three times, following Deadpool, Zootopia, The Jungle Book, Finding Dory, Suicide Squad, and Moana.
In its fourth weekend, Sunday projections had the film grossing $22 million, besting newcomer Hidden Figures' $21.8 million.
However, final figures the following day revealed the film tallied a weekend total of $21.9 million, falling to second place behind Hidden Figures' $22.8 million.
===
Critical response ===
On Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 84% based on 446 reviews, with an average rating of 7.48/10.
The website's critical consensus reads, "Rogue One draws deep on Star Wars mythology while breaking new narrative and aesthetic ground and suggesting a bright blockbuster future for the franchise.
"
On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score 65 out of 100, based on 51 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews".
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A" on an A+ to F scale, while PostTrak reported filmgoers gave the film a 91% overall positive score.
IGN reviewer Eric Goldman gave the film 9/10, saying, "Rogue One is a movie crammed with fan service, but when fan service is done this well, there's little to complain about and much to adore."
Peter Travers of Rolling Stone gave the film 3.5 out of 4 stars, writing, "
this spin-off/prequel has the same primitive, lived-in, emotional, loopy, let's-put-on-a-show spirit that made us fall in love with the original trilogy."
/Film gave Rogue One 8/10, writing that the film is enjoyable but does not have the emotional weight of The Force Awakens, because "no character in Rogue One was strongly compelling".
PopMatters wrote, "Rogue One seems to enjoy spending time on a whole new batch of moons and planets we haven't seen before, reveling in the clutter and clamor of far-flung settlements where anti-Imperial sentiments fester.
But the film is bogged down in engineering the complex maneuverings of spy games, dogfights, and the most sprawling Rebel-versus-Empire land battle scene since the opening of The Empire Strikes Back."
Justin Chang, writing for the Los Angeles Times, called Rogue One "a swiftly paced, rough-and-ready entertainment".
The New York Times wrote, "All the pieces are there, in other words, like Lego figures in a box.
The problem is that the filmmakers haven't really bothered to think of anything very interesting to do with them.
A couple of 9-year-olds on a screen-free rainy afternoon would come up with better adventures, and probably also better dialogue."
Richard Brody of The New Yorker called the film "lobotomized and "depersonalized", and wrote it "isn't so much a movie as a feature-length promotional film for itself; it's a movie that is still waiting to be made."
The Washington Post wrote "Rogue One represents an unobjectionable exercise in franchise extension.
It's fine.
It'll do.
For now.
"IndieWire's David Ehrlich gave the film a C+ rating, calling it "a spirited but agonizingly safe attempt to expand cinema's most holy blockbuster franchise and keep the wheels greased between proper installments ... just a glorified excuse to retcon some sense into one of the silliest things about the original".
While he praised the set design and visuals, calling them "gorgeous", he criticized a lack of interesting character development and a script that felt "completely constricted by its purpose".
Peter Bradshaw, film critic of The Guardian says, "Rogue One doesn't really go rogue at any stage, and it isn't a pop culture event like The Force Awakens, in whose slipstream this appears; part of its charm resides in the eerie, almost dreamlike effect of continually producing familiar elements, reshuffled and reconfigured, a reaching back to the past and hinting at a preordained future.
There are some truly spectacular cameos from much-loved personae, involving next-level digital effects—almost creepily exact, so that watching feels at various stages like going into a time machine, back to the 80s and 70s".
Rogue One introduced many new characters into the Star Wars mythology, with Chirrut Îmwe, played by Donnie Yen, and K-2SO, played by Alan Tudyk, being the most popular.
In a poll on the official Star Wars website in May 2017, in which more than 30,000 people voted, Chirrut Îmwe was voted as the most popular Rogue One character.
George Lucas was reported to have enjoyed the film more than The Force Awakens; upon hearing this, Gareth Edwards said, "I can die happy now.
"The
film was praised for its exploration of ethics in engineering; in a reviewer's words, "the core ethical arc of the film is one man's decision to engineer the Death Star in such a way as to prevent its use for galactic domination.
One could fairly retitle the movie to 'Rogue One: an Engineering Ethics Story.'
"

====
Digital recreation ====
While much of the computer-generated imagery (CGI) received praise, some news organizations published criticism about certain aspects, including the visual effects (VFX) that were used to revive Peter Cushing, who had died in 1994, as Grand Moff Tarkin.
The Guardian's Catherine Shoard described the "resurrection" as a "digital indignity".
Joseph Walsh of The Guardian raised legal and ethical issues about bringing a long-dead actor to life.
However, Lucasfilm had obtained permission from Cushing's estate before deciding to use his likeness.
The Washington Times' Eric Althoff rejected the entire concept of using CGI to recreate a deceased actor: "Alas, what we get is, basically, not a simulation, but an approximation of a simulation—a dead character portrayed by a living actor inhabiting not the character, but imitating the dead actor.
"Some
journalists also criticized the quality of the CGI that was used to represent a younger Carrie Fisher in order to portray Princess Leia at an earlier time, as well as its suitability in movie-making.
Eliana Dockterman of Time wrote that "there was something particularly plastic about this version of the young Carrie Fisher—so smooth and so perfect it couldn't be real—that pulled me out of the moment."
Kelly Lawler of USA
Today said: "... while Tarkin is merely unnerving, the Leia cameo is so jarring as to take the audience completely out of the film at its most emotional moment.
Leia's appearance was meant to help the film end on a hopeful note (quite literally, as 'hope' is her line), but instead it ends on a weird and unsettling one."
Michael Cavna of The Washington Post described the facial effect as feeling "distractingly artificial and nearly alien, like a plastered death mask robbed of authentic actorly effect, well beyond the usual artifice of Botox."
Nonetheless, Fisher was shown the CGI rendition of her younger self for the film by Kathleen Kennedy and "loved it."
===
Accolades ===


==
In other media ==


===
Television ===
Rogue One
utilized Saw Gerrera, a character introduced in the animated television series The Clone Wars, as well as featuring cameo appearances of the Ghost and Chopper from the animated series Star Wars Rebels, and mentioning Hera Syndulla from that series.

Characters from the film also appeared in the second half of Rebels, starting with Saw in the hour-long Season 3 episode "Ghosts of Geonosis".
The Imperial Death Troopers appeared in the same season's hour-long finale, "Zero Hour".
More characters and vehicles that were first introduced in the film appear in the series' fourth and final season, while the film's main antagonist, Orson Krennic, is mentioned by name.
On November 8, 2018, it was announced that a live-action prequel series was officially in development and set to air on Disney's streaming service, Disney+.
The series will take place before the events in Rogue One and will focus on Cassian Andor with Diego Luna reprising the role.
Additionally, Alan Tudyk is also reprising his role as K-2SO.

===
Tie-in novels ===
A tie-in novel to the film, Catalyst: A Rogue One Novel, was released on November 15, 2016.
Written by veteran Star Wars novelist James Luceno, the story is set some years before the events of Rogue One, and provides a backstory to the 2016 film.
The novelization of the film was written by Alexander Freed, and released on December 16, 2016.Months after the film was released, Disney | Lucasfilm Press published another novel titled Star Wars: Rebel Rising on May 2, 2017.

Written by Beth Revis, the novel explains what happened to Jyn Erso between the time her mother died and the day when Rebel agents freed her from an Imperial labor camp, a time period that the film skips over in its opening minutes.

On the same day Rebel Rising was released, the novel Guardians of the Whills was released as well by Disney | Lucasfilm Press.
Written by novelist and comic writer Greg Rucka, it focused on the characters Chirrut and Baze, telling their backstories as well as giving more context to the events that happened on Jedha prior to the film and even the Imperial occupation.

===
Comics ===
Months after the film was released, Marvel Comics adapted the film into a six-part comic book miniseries, which adds extra content.

The miniseries' complete collection was released on December 12, 2017.

In August 2017, IDW Publishing announced that it would make a one-shot graphic novel adaptation of the film, which was released one day after the Marvel miniseries' collection was released.

Unlike the Marvel miniseries, this graphic novel will have slightly more cartoonish visuals.
In the same month, Marvel Comics released the Star Wars: Rogue One – Cassian & K-2SO Special, a 40-page one-shot comic focusing on the first meeting between Cassian Andor and K-2SO.
The comic was written by Duane Swierczynski and pencilled by Fernando Blanco.

===
Video games ===
A downloadable expansion pack was released for the Star Wars Battlefront reboot, titled Rogue One: Scarif, that allows players the ability to play through the various locations, characters and set pieces from the planet introduced in Rogue One.
A free virtual reality mission for PlayStation 4 was also released alongside the expansion.
The sequel to the Star Wars Battlefront reboot, Star Wars Battlefront 2 (2017), released an update including the planet Scarif as a location for several of its gamemodes.
Several characters and concepts from the film were also included in the mobile games Star Wars: Force Arena, Star Wars Commander, and Star Wars: Galaxy of Heroes, all available on iOS and Android.

== See also ==
2016 in science fiction
List of films featuring eclipses
List of films featuring extraterrestrials
List of films featuring space stations
List of Star Wars films and television series


==
References ==
Footnotes
Citations


==
External links ==
Official website
Rogue One: A Star Wars Story at Starwars.com
Rogue One: A Star Wars Story at Lucasfilm.com
Rogue One: A Star Wars Story at IMDb
Rogue One:
A Star Wars Story on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Solo:
A Star Wars Story (or simply Solo) is a 2018 American space Western film centering on the Star Wars character Han Solo, also featuring his original trilogy co-protagonists Chewbacca and Lando Calrissian.
Directed by Ron Howard, produced by Lucasfilm and distributed by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures, it is the second Star Wars anthology film, following Rogue One (2016).
Alden Ehrenreich stars in the title role, with Woody Harrelson, Emilia Clarke, Donald Glover, Thandie Newton, Phoebe Waller-Bridge, Joonas Suotamo and Paul Bettany co-starring.
The film explores the early adventures of Han Solo and Chewbacca, who join a heist within the criminal underworld 10 years prior to the events of Star Wars.

Star Wars creator George Lucas began developing a Han Solo prequel in 2012, and commissioned Lawrence Kasdan to write the screenplay.
After Lucas sold Lucasfilm to Disney in 2012, Kasdan was hired to write Star Wars:
The Force Awakens (2015), leaving his son Jonathan to complete the Solo script.
Principal photography began in January 2017 at Pinewood Studios, under the direction of Phil Lord and Christopher Miller.
Both were fired in June 2017 following "creative differences" with Lucasfilm, and Howard was hired as their replacement.
With an estimated production budget of at least $275 million, it is one of the most expensive films ever made.

Solo released in the United States on May 25, 2018, and received generally favorable reviews from critics who praised the film's cast (particularly Ehrenreich and Glover), visuals, musical score, and action sequences, while some criticized its storyline and screenplay.
It is the first Star Wars film to be considered a box office bomb, grossing $393.2 million worldwide, making it the lowest-grossing live-action film in the franchise.
It received a nomination for Best Visual Effects at the 91st Academy Awards.

==
Plot ==
On the planet Corellia, orphans Han and Qi'ra escape a local gang.
They bribe an Imperial officer with stolen starship fuel, known as coaxium, for passage on a transport, but Qi'ra is captured before she can board.
Han vows to return for her and joins the Imperial Navy as a flight cadet, being given the surname "Solo".

Three years later, Han is serving as an infantryman on Mimban following his expulsion from the Imperial Flight Academy for insubordination.
He encounters a group of criminals posing as Imperial soldiers, led by Tobias Beckett.
Han attempts to blackmail Beckett into letting him join the gang, but Beckett has him arrested and thrown into a pit to be fed to a Wookiee prisoner named Chewbacca.
Able to understand Chewbacca's language, Han persuades him to cooperate to escape.
Beckett, aware of the usefulness of a Wookiee's strength, rescues and enlists them in the gang to steal a shipment of coaxium on Vandor-1.
The plan fails when the Cloud Riders, a band of marauders led by Enfys Nest, arrive to hijack the shipment.
The resulting chaos leads to the destruction of the coaxium and the deaths of Beckett's wife Val and another crewman, Rio.

Beckett reveals that he was ordered to steal the shipment for Dryden Vos, a high-ranking crime boss in the Crimson Dawn syndicate.
Han and Chewbacca volunteer to help him steal another shipment to repay the debt so that Vos will not kill him.
They travel to Vos's yacht where Han finds Qi'ra, who has joined Crimson Dawn as Vos's top lieutenant.
Han suggests a risky plan to steal unrefined coaxium from the mines on Kessel; Vos approves but insists that Qi'ra accompany the team.
She leads them to Lando Calrissian, a smuggler and pilot, who she hopes will lend them his ship, the Millennium Falcon.
Han challenges Lando to a game of sabacc, with the wager being Lando's ship.
Lando cheats to win but agrees to join the mission in exchange for a share of the profits.

After reaching Kessel in the Falcon and infiltrating the mine, Lando's droid co-pilot L3-37 instigates a slave revolt.
They steal the coaxium in the confusion, but L3 is fatally damaged and Lando is wounded during the escape.
With the help of L3's navigational computer, uploaded into the ship's systems, Han pilots the ship through the dangerous and uncharted Kessel Run to elude an Imperial blockade.
The Falcon, badly damaged, lands on the planet Savareen to process the coaxium.

Enfys arrives, having tracked the team from Vandor, and Lando leaves in the Falcon, deserting everyone else.
Enfys reveals that she and her crew are rebels trying to strike back at the syndicates and the Empire.
Han becomes sympathetic to their cause and tries to trick Vos, who reveals Beckett has already alerted him to the double-cross.
Vos sends his guards to kill Enfys, but the Cloud Riders overpower them, leaving Vos defenseless.
Having anticipated Vos's strategy, Han tries to take the coaxium, but Beckett betrays Vos and escapes with it, taking Chewbacca hostage.
Qi'ra kills Vos and sends Han after Beckett.
She contacts Vos's superior, Force-wielder Maul, to inform him of the mission's failure, which she blames on Beckett.
Maul orders Qi'ra to meet with him on Dathomir.

Han confronts Beckett and shoots him before he can return fire.
Qi'ra leaves in Vos's yacht, while Han and Chewbacca give the coaxium to Enfys, who offers Han a chance to join the rebellion against the Empire.
He declines, and she gives him a vial of coaxium, enough to purchase a ship of his own.

Han and Chewbacca locate Lando and challenge him to a rematch in sabacc, once again wagering the Falcon.
This time Han wins in a fair game after having stolen the hidden card from Lando that he used to cheat his way to victory the first time.
Han and Chewbacca then leave for Tatooine to find the crime lord  mentioned by Beckett who is putting together a big, profitable job.

== Cast ==

Alden Ehrenreich as Han Solo:
A cynical smuggler who joins Beckett's crew.
When asked how Solo differs from Han's appearance in other Star Wars films, Ehrenreich stated, "I think the main thing that's different is that the Han we meet in this film is more of an idealist.
He has certain dreams that he follows, and we watch how it affects him as those dreams meet new realities—realities that are harder and more challenging than he'd expected."
Harrison Ford, who portrayed the character in previous films, met with Ehrenreich, giving him some insight and words of advice.

Woody Harrelson as Tobias Beckett: A criminal and Han's mentor.
The character of Beckett was based on Long John Silver from Treasure Island by Robert Louis Stevenson.

Emilia Clarke as Qi'ra: Han's childhood friend and romantic interest.
Describing her character, Clarke said: "She has a couple of guises, but essentially she is just fighting to stay alive.
If you've got a really glamorous lady in a really sordid environment, you kind of know the glamor is hiding a few rough roads.
"
With regard to her character's relationship with Solo, Clarke offered that "They grew up as comrades, essentially.
They grew up as pals, as partners in crime.
There is obviously the romantic side of things.
But they grew up together.
So they were kids together."

Donald Glover as Lando Calrissian: A smuggler, gambler, and self-proclaimed sportsman on the rise in the galaxy's underworld.
Billy Dee Williams, who portrayed the character in previous films, met with Glover, giving him some insight and words of advice.

Thandie Newton as Val: Beckett's wife, a fellow criminal and member of her husband's crew.

Phoebe Waller-Bridge as L3-37:
Lando's droid companion and navigator.
When the character dies in the film her consciousness and data are uploaded to the Millennium Falcon which serves as a retcon of the previous Star Wars films including The Empire Strikes Back in which the starship was described as having "the most peculiar dialect".
Screenwriter Jonathan Kasdan explained that this was done to give "the Falcon a personality that is fused with this amazing character played by Phoebe [which] I think does actually enrich the other movies".

Joonas Suotamo as Chewbacca: Han's Wookiee sidekick and best friend, who also serves as his first mate.
Suotamo reprises his role from The Force Awakens and The Last Jedi, in the former of which he acted as a body double for Peter Mayhew, who portrayed the character in previous films.

Paul Bettany as Dryden Vos: A ruthless crime lord who has a history with Beckett.
Michael K. Williams had originally been cast, but he was removed from the final film after being unable to return to set during the film's reshoots.
Bettany was cast in his place, with the character being reworked from a motion-capture alien (described by Williams as half-mountain lion, half-human) to a scarred near-human alien lifeform.
Erin Kellyman appears as Enfys Nest, the leader of a gang of pirates called Cloud Riders.
Jon Favreau voices Rio Durant, "a very cool and important alien character" and member of Beckett's crew, and Linda Hunt voices Lady Proxima, the serpent-like leader of the gang to which teenage Han and Qi'ra belong.
Ian Kenny portrays Rebolt while Clint Howard portrays Ralakili.
Additionally, Anthony Daniels cameos as Tak.
Kiran Shah plays
Karjj and Warwick Davis briefly reprises his role from The Phantom Menace as Weazel, a Cloud Rider.
Ray Park reprises his role as Maul, with Sam Witwer providing the voice, reprising the role from The Clone Wars and Rebels animated TV series.
Peter Serafinowicz, Maul's original voice actor in The Phantom Menace, was initially brought to record Maul's dialogue, but his vocal performance was ultimately dropped in favor of Witwer's.
Dee Tails appears as Quay Tolsite, the director of the Pyke Syndicate's operations on Kessel.
Screenwriter Jonathan Kasdan and first assistant director Toby Hefferman portrayed Tag Greenley and Bink Otauna, respectively—two characters that first appeared in the Star Wars Legends comics published by Dark Horse Comics.
The scene was not included in the finished film.

==
Production ==


===
Development ===
A first attempt of appearance of a kid Han Solo is present during the pre-production of Star Wars:
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith, showing an early draft of a young Solo that takes part in the battle on Kashyyyk.

Later, a planned live-action TV series developed by Star Wars creator George Lucas titled Star Wars:
Underworld would have depicted Han Solo's first meeting with Chewbacca and his winning the Millennium Falcon from Lando Calrissian.
In 2012, Lucas began developing a film about a young Solo, and hired veteran Star Wars screenwriter Lawrence Kasdan to write the screenplay.
After Lucas sold his company to Disney in 2012, Kasdan was hired to help finish the script for Star Wars:
The Force Awakens, leaving his son Jonathan Kasdan in charge of writing Solo until his return.
The film was internally codenamed "Harry and the Boy" and initially planned to follow The Force Awakens.
In February 2013, Disney CEO Bob Iger confirmed the development of two Star Wars standalone films, one written by Lawrence Kasdan.
Shortly thereafter, it was reported that Disney was working on a film featuring Solo.
Disney CFO Jay Rasulo described the standalone films as origin stories.
In July, Lucasfilm announced that an anthology film focusing "on how [a] young Han Solo became the smuggler, thief, and scoundrel whom Luke Skywalker and Obi-Wan Kenobi first encountered in the cantina at Mos Eisley" would be released on May 25, 2018.
The project was to be directed by Phil Lord and Christopher Miller from a script by Lawrence and Jonathan Kasdan.
Kathleen Kennedy would serve as a producer, with Lawrence Kasdan and Jason McGatlin as executive producers; Allison Shearmur and Simon Emanuel also produce.
Solo's Wookiee friend Chewbacca was also announced to appear in the film.
In May 2016, Lawrence Kasdan stated that filming would start in January 2017.

===
Casting ===
In January 2016, a list of actors was revealed for the role of young Han Solo, including Miles Teller, Ansel Elgort, Dave Franco, Jack Reynor, Scott Eastwood, Logan Lerman, Emory Cohen, and Blake Jenner.

In March 2016, it was reported that Alden Ehrenreich, Reynor and Taron Egerton were on a shortlist for the role.
In May 2016, Ehrenreich was reported to have been cast as the young Han Solo, and was revealed in the role at Star Wars Celebration Europe III two months later.
Miller called casting the role one of "the hardest casting challenges of all time", adding that they "saw over 3,000 people for the part".
Other actors to audition for the role included Chandler Riggs, Rami Malek, Aaron Taylor-Johnson, Tom Felton, Nick Robinson, Colton Haynes, Joshua Sasse and Ed Westwick.
By the following October, Tessa Thompson, Naomi Scott, Zoë Kravitz, Emilia Clarke, Kiersey Clemons, Jessica Henwick and Adria Arjona were being considered for the female lead, while Donald Glover was being considered to play a young Lando Calrissian.
Glover was confirmed for Calrissian shortly after, with Clarke cast as the female lead the following month.
Shameik Moore also auditioned for the role of Calrissian.
In early January 2017, Woody Harrelson was revealed to be in negotiations to portray Han Solo's mentor, and was confirmed to be appearing in the film shortly after.
Christian Bale had previously been in discussions for the role.
A subsequent interview with Harrelson bolstered speculation that he may be specifically playing Legends character Garris Shrike, but Harrelson revealed the character's name as Beckett in March 2017.
In February 2017, Phoebe Waller-Bridge joined the cast in an undisclosed role, said to be "a CGI-driven performance" similar to Alan Tudyk in Rogue One as the droid K-2SO.
Additionally, it was reported that Thandie Newton was in negotiations to star in the film.
Waller-Bridge and Newton were confirmed as part of the cast by the end of February, alongside the announcement that Joonas Suotamo would appear as Chewbacca, reprising the role from The Force Awakens and The Last Jedi, where he shared it with original Chewbacca actor Peter Mayhew.
Michael K. Williams entered talks to join the film in early March 2017, and was confirmed shortly after, portraying a half-human, half-animal creature.
By the end of the month, Ian Kenny had joined the cast.
Warwick Davis was confirmed as part of the cast by the end of July 2017.Peter
Serafinowicz was set to reprise his voice role as Maul and had recorded dialogue during production at Pinewood Studios.
He was later informed by Lucasfilm after the film's premiere that he had been replaced by Sam Witwer in order to maintain continuity with The Clone Wars and Rebels animated TV series, in which Witwer voiced the character.

===
Filming ===
Filming began on January 30, 2017, at Pinewood Studios, under the working title Star Wars: Red Cup.
By February 10, the film had spent $54.5 million on production.
Lucasfilm announced that principal photography started on February 20, 2017.
Bradford Young served as the cinematographer for the film.
In May 2017, filming took place in Italy, with locations including Tre Cime di Lavaredo and Monte Piana in the Dolomites in Veneto, to the Fassa Dolomites in Trentino.
Filming also took place in the Canary Islands that month.
On June 20, 2017, citing "creative differences", Lucasfilm announced that the directors had left the project with a new director "to be announced soon".
It was reported that the directors were fired after Kennedy and Lawrence Kasdan disagreed with their shooting style; Lord and Miller believed they were hired to make a comedy film, while Lucasfilm was looking for the duo only to add "a comedic touch".
Lucasfilm also felt the directors were encouraging too much improvisation from the actors, which was believed to be "shifting the story off-course" from the Kasdans' script.
To appease Kasdan, who was unhappy with scenes not being filmed "word for word", Lord and Miller shot several takes exactly as written, then shot additional takes.
Lord and Miller refused to compromise on certain scenes, such as filming a scene from fewer angles than Lucasfilm expected, thereby reducing the options available in editing.
The duo were also unhappy when Lawrence Kasdan was brought to the London set, feeling he became a "shadow director".
The decision to remove Lord and Miller was made after a short hiatus in filming taken to review the footage so far.
The original film editor, Chris Dickens, was also removed from the film, replaced by Pietro Scalia.

It was reported that Ron Howard, who had previously collaborated with Lucas as an actor in American Graffiti (1973) and the director of Willow (1988), was a frontrunner to step in as director.
Howard had turned down an offer to direct Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace.
Joe Johnston and Kasdan were also considered, though in regards to Kasdan Directors Guild of America rules state that a replacement for a director may not be someone already involved in the production.
Two days later, it was announced that Howard would take over directing for the remaining three-and-a-half weeks of scheduled principal photography as well as the scheduled five weeks of reshoots.
Howard wrote, "I'm beyond grateful to add my voice to the Star Wars universe...
I hope to honor the great work already done and help deliver on the promise of a Han Solo film.
"
Howard was expected to arrive in London on June 26 to complete filming.
During the reshoots, actor Michael K. Williams was unable to return to the production, due to a schedule conflict with filming The Red Sea Diving Resort, resulting in his part being redeveloped and recast with Paul Bettany.
Williams stated the reshoots for his character were "to match the new direction which the producers wanted Ron to carry the film in", and that he would not have been available again until November 2017; the production did not want to wait for his availability to make a release in May 2018.
Bettany, who previously worked with Howard on A Beautiful Mind, had heard of the director's involvement with the film and texted him to inquire into joining the film.
"
Two weeks later I was flying to London to be in ‘Star Wars‘"
Bettany detailed in a May 2018 interview with The Los Angeles Times.
Lucas, Howard's friend, mentor and collaborator, made a surprise visit to the set to encourage Howard on his first day shooting.
Intended as a short meeting, Lucas spent the whole day with the crew.
While Lucas had not meant to interfere, at some point he forgot and asked "Why doesn't Han just do this?";
Howard included his suggestion.
On October 17, 2017, Howard announced that principal photography had been completed, and revealed the title of the film.
In March 2018, after it was reported Howard had reshot around 70% of the film, it was announced that Lord and Miller would not challenge for director credit and instead agreed to executive producer credits.
The duo saw an early cut of Howard's film and provided him with their feedback.
Post-production wrapped on April 22, 2018.

===
Visual effects ===
The visual effects were provided by Industrial Light & Magic, Hybride and Blind LTD and Supervised by Nigel Sumner, Julian Foddy, Greg Kegel, Joseph Kasparian, Francois Lambert, Andrew Booth, Rob Bredow and Patrick Tubach with the help of Jellyfish Pictures, Raynault VFX, Lola VFX and Nvizage.
Bredow described working on the train heist scene as a challenge.
"
I’ve always in my own life referenced the Star Wars films in terms of having the coolest explosions ever, you know, back to Joe Viskocil’s explosions of the Death Star and the way those evolved over time.
It was like, ‘How am I going to do something that’s different and unique in the Star Wars universe?".
He would utilize miniature models and built a 3D model of the mountain in the film and blew it up with a variety of firecrackers within a large fish tank built at Pinewood.
The team took inspiration from the YouTube channel
The Slow Mo Guys, specifically a video of the creators Gavin Free and Daniel Gruchy conducting an experiment that saw them blowing up firecrackers in a fish tank to capture the explosion in slow motion.60 versions of the design of the Millennium Falcon were created before the final version seen in the film was settled on.
Taken into consideration by the design team was 1970s culture, examining muscle cars, as well as concept art drafted for the 1977 film.
Lead designer James Clyne described adding an escape pod to the front of the ship as solving a curiosity he had as a boy as to why the Falcon had that design.
Rear-projection visual effects, a technique used to combine foreground performances with pre-filmed backgrounds, were used for the Falcon cockpit scenes, an updated version of the technique used in the original trilogy.
This allowed the actors to have a visual reference for the scene.
The creation of L3 was a combination of practical and visual effects.
Actress Phoebe Waller-Bridge was present on set and wore a costume to perform her scenes, with post-production visual effects done to erase Waller-Bridge out of the footage and to add in interior pieces and wires.

===
Music ===
In July 2017, John Powell was announced as the main composer of the score.
Longtime Star Wars composer John Williams composed and conducted the Han Solo theme,
"The Adventures of Han", for the film.
Powell began writing the music in late 2017 after finishing his work on Ferdinand.
In December 2017, Williams wrote two musical pieces and combined them to create Han's theme.
The following month, Williams recorded the demos with the Recording Arts Orchestra of Los Angeles at the Newman Scoring Stage.
Powell interpolated Williams' new theme into his score, as well as incorporating music by Williams from previous Star Wars films, including the Star Wars main title, and several motifs and cues from A New Hope, The Empire Strikes Back, and The Phantom Menace.
Walt Disney Records released the soundtrack album on May 25.
In December 2020, Mondo Death Waltz released the soundtrack on 180g vinyl and limited "hyperspace" vinyl.
It has since been lauded as one of Mondo's best releases and praised the designs
In September 2020, Powell announced on social media that a deluxe edition of the soundtrack album would be remixed and mastered by 5 Cat Studios, featuring all unedited cues from the score and additional demos that Williams had composed for the film.
The deluxe edition was released by Walt Disney Records on November 20, 2020, featuring an additional 40 minutes of previously unreleased music.

==
Release ==


===
Theatrical ===
Solo had its world premiere on May 10, 2018 at the El Capitan Theatre in Los Angeles, and also screened on May 15, 2018 at the 2018 Cannes Film Festival.
The film debuted in selected countries on May 23 and had its US release on May 25, 2018, the 41st anniversary of the release of the original Star Wars film, in which Harrison Ford first appeared as Han Solo.
===
Marketing ===
A "sneak peek" TV spot was released during Super Bowl LII on February 4, 2018.
It became the most popular Super Bowl trailer on YouTube with 8 million views.
It also had 5.9 million views on Facebook.
The first official teaser trailer was released on February 5, 2018.
Graeme McMillan of The Hollywood Reporter criticized the trailer as "dull", and compared it negatively to the look of Rogue One, opining that the visuals "should be the hive of scum and villainy of the Cantina of the very first movie, filled with colorful aliens and things happening all over the place.
That busyness, the sense of danger and hustle, feels appropriate for Solo in a way that what's on show in this first trailer simply doesn't."
He also noted that several plot elements presented in the trailer were reminiscent of The Han Solo Trilogy, a series of novels published in 1997 and 1998.In early March 2018, French artist Hachim Bahous asserted that Disney had plagiarized a series of album covers he designed for Sony Music's label Legacy Recordings in France with character posters for the film.
Disney stated they were investigating the alleged plagiarism and that the Solo posters had been produced by an outside vendor.

==
Reception ==


===
Box office ==
=
Solo:
A Star Wars Story grossed $213.8 million in the United States and Canada, and $179.4 million in other territories, for a total worldwide gross of $393.2 million.
With an estimated production budget of $275 million, the film needed to gross at least $500 million worldwide to break even.
A week after its worldwide debut of just $147.5 million, Variety wrote that the film would lose Disney "tens of millions of dollars" off a projected final total gross of $400–450 million while The Hollywood Reporter estimated the losses would range from $50 to $80 million.
In April 2019, Deadline Hollywood calculated the film lost the studio $76.9 million, when factoring together all expenses and revenues.
In June 2018, in response to the film's poor commercial performance, director Ron Howard tweeted he was proud of the film, and sorry that fans were not turning out to see it, but was happy for those who had enjoyed it.
The following year, Howard stated that online trolls were partially to blame for the film's underwhelming box-office performance.

====
United States and Canada ====
Initial projections three weeks before its release had the film grossing around $170 million over its four-day Memorial Day opening weekend.
Deadline Hollywood noted that it was tracking higher than the previous Star Wars spin-off film, Rogue One (which debuted to $155 million), and had more interest from audiences than the likes of fellow blockbusters Spider-Man: Homecoming and Guardians of the Galaxy Vol.
2.
After its first day of pre-sales, Fandango announced the film was the second-best seller of advance tickets in 2018, after Avengers: Infinity War.
At the week of its release, projections had the film making $135–170 million over the four-day frame, with Disney predicting a $130–150 million debut.
The film opened in 4,381 theaters, the ninth-highest total ever, including 3,300 3D locations and 400 IMAX screens.
It grossed $14.1 million from Thursday night previews, the lowest of the Disney Star Wars films but the best-ever for Memorial Day weekend, besting the $13.2 million made by Pirates of the Caribbean: At World's End (2007).
Including Thursday previews, the film made $35.6 million on its first day, lowering weekend projections to $115 million.
It grossed just $84.4 million in its opening weekend (and $103 million over the four–day weekend), far below projections and marking the lowest Star Wars debut since Attack of the Clones (2002), although it did set a new career-high opening for Howard.
Deadline Hollywood compared the below-expectations opening to Justice League the previous November, and attributed it to fan negativity toward the concept and the behind-the-scenes problems, as well as competition from Deadpool 2 and Avengers: Infinity War.
Many analysts and publications, including Deadline, The Atlantic, Entertainment Weekly and CNN, interpreted the low box office returns as a case of "Star Wars fatigue", since Solo was the fourth film of the series released in 29 months, and came just five months after The Last Jedi.
Other analysts attributed the film's underperformance to lackluster marketing, as well as the divided fan reception to The Last Jedi.
Solo dropped 65% in its second weekend to $29.4 million, the worst sophomore frame for any Star Wars film since the original trilogy.
It dropped another 46% in its third weekend to $15.7 million, finishing second behind newcomer Ocean's 8, and $10 million in its fourth week, finishing fourth.
====
Other territories ====
Worldwide the film was expected to make $285–340 million in its opening weekend, including $150–170 million internationally.
It opened in 43 markets on the Wednesday and Thursday prior to its US release and made a total of $11.4 million, including $3.3 million in China.
It went on to open to just $65 million internationally and $147.5 million worldwide.
It grossed $10.3 million in the United Kingdom, and also finished first in Australia ($5 million), Germany ($4.3 million), France ($3.9 million), Russia ($3.6 million), Spain ($2.6 million), Mexico ($2.5 million), Italy ($2.2 million) and Brazil ($1.3 million).
Despite being the second-largest international opening, it made just $10.1 million in China, far below the other three Disney Star Wars films.
The film held a better-than-expected 47% in its second weekend, making $30.3 million from 54 countries and remaining the top film in several, including Australia, Spain and the United Kingdom.

===
Critical response ===
On review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes, Solo has an approval rating of 69% based on 476 reviews, with an average rating of 6.4/10.
The site's critical consensus reads, "
A flawed yet fun and fast-paced space adventure, Solo:
A Star Wars Story should satisfy newcomers to the saga as well as longtime fans who check their expectations at the theater door."
On Metacritic, which assigns a normalized rating to reviews, the film has a weighted average score of 62 out of 100, based on 54 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews".
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A−" on an A+ to F scale, while PostTrak reported that 89% of filmgoers gave it positive score, with 73% saying they would recommend it.
Writing for Rolling Stone, Peter Travers gave the film 2.5 stars out of 4, complimenting the cast but criticizing the lack of creativity, saying, "somehow Han Solo—the roguish Star Wars hellion famous for breaking all the rules—finds himself in a feel-good movie that doesn't break any."
A. O. Scott of The New York Times said, "It doesn't take itself too seriously, but it also holds whatever irreverent, anarchic impulses it might possess in careful check."
He noted that it is "a curiously low-stakes blockbuster, in effect a filmed Wikipedia page".
Michael Rechtshaffen of The Hollywood Reporter praised the cast and production values but felt the film as a whole felt too safe, writing, "while Ehrenreich's Solo proves adept at maneuvering the Millennium Falcon out of some tight spots, the picture itself follows a safely predictable course.
Missing here are the sort of plot-related or visual curveballs thrown by Rian Johnson's The Last Jedi or Gareth Edwards with Rogue One.
"Particular
praise was pointed towards Glover's performance as Lando Calrissian.
USA Today asserted that Glover's Calrissian "outshone and outswaggered" the title character of Solo.
TheWrap compared Glover to Cary Grant, proclaiming "Glover sweeps this film off its feet".
While also praising the rest of the cast, Stephanie Zacharek of Time singled Glover out particularly, highlighting his "unruly, charismatic elegance".
Ron Howard said that original Han Solo actor Harrison Ford saw the film twice and spoke positively about it and Ehrenreich's performance.
Billy Dee Williams was more critical of the film, particularly due to the direction of Calrissian: "I think that the reason they didn't have the success they could have had, [is] because they were going for something that was topical, instead of an adventure that's far beyond those questions.
If you're talking about this huge, incredible story, why lock yourself into this tiny moment between a character like Lando and his robot friend?"
In other interviews, he complimented other aspects of the film, including Glover's perceptions of Lando's gender fluidity: "That kid is brilliant!"
===
Accolades ===


== Future ==
Alden Ehrenreich confirmed his contract deal to appear as Han Solo extended for two additional films, giving the studio the option to pursue a sequel to Solo: A Star Wars Story, or feature him in other anthology films in a supporting capacity.
Ehrenreich said he would like any sequels to differentiate themselves from the previous Star Wars trilogies by being standalone, in the vein of the Indiana Jones films, rather than direct follow-ups.
Emilia Clarke, who played Qi'ra, also signed on for future installments.
Ron Howard said that while no sequel was in development, it was up to the fans to decide.
Critics noted the film intentionally left room open for sequels.
Solo writer Jon Kasdan said that he would include bounty hunter Bossk (who briefly appears in The Empire Strikes Back and is mentioned in Solo) if he were to write a sequel for the film.
Kennedy also said that a film focusing on Lando Calrissian could happen, but was not a priority.
Donald Glover also expressed interest in a spin-off film, saying he would imagine it as Catch Me
If You Can in space.
On June 20, 2018, Collider claimed that all future anthology films were on hold due to the disappointing financial performance of Solo.
A day later, Lucasfilm denied the rumors as "inaccurate" and  confirmed that there are multiple unannounced films in development.
Bob Iger has said that the production of new films would go on hiatus after 2019's The Rise of Skywalker, though none were cancelled.
On May 23, 2019, the hosts of The Resistance Broadcast encouraged fans on social media to use the hashtag #MakeSolo2Happen.
The campaign was a mixture of celebrating the first movie and to spread awareness that a sequel is wanted.
The campaign reached multiple people involved with the film, including Ron Howard.
To express his gratitude, Jon Kasdan tweeted an image of three crime syndicate logos, hinting that future stories could still be in the works.
Kasdan has hinted that a sequel could feature Jabba the Hutt, being an origin story of Solo partnering up with the character.
In March 2020, Kasdan tweeted that he did not "think anyone's pursuing a Solo sequel at the moment ...
I think a feature, at this point, would be a tough sell".
On May 25, 2020, fans again used the hashtag #MakeSolo2Happen to show their appreciation for the film on its second anniversary.
The hashtag went viral with fans arguing that the film deserved more praise and once again calls were made for a continuation of the story.
A number of people tweeting with the hashtag expressed their desire to see more of Emilia Clarke's Qi'ra.
Rita Dorsch of Comic Book Resources said that, by far, the most interesting part of Solo is Qi'ra's turn and that any follow-up film needs to focus on her.
Writing for CinemaBlend, Dirk Libbey stated.
"
it seems unlikely that the Solo 2 fans will get the movie they want.
Of course, some don't actually need a theatrical follow-up.
They would be happy with a Disney+ series that didn't even necessarily include Han Solo, but instead focused on the criminal organization being run by Qi'ra".

==
Adaptations ==
A novelization by Mur Lafferty, Solo:
A Star Wars Story:
Expanded Edition (ISBN 978-0525619390) was published on September 4, 2018 by Del Rey Books.
It includes scenes from alternate versions of the film's script, including scenes in which Qi’ra is brought back to Lady Proxima, Chewbacca uses some of Lando's "outrageously expensive" bathroom products, and, in an epilogue, Enfys Nest delivers the coaxium to Saw Gerrera and Jyn Erso.
Additionally, a seven-issue comic book adaptation of the film was published by Marvel Comics starting in October 2018, written by Robbie Thompson and pencilled by Will Sliney.

==
References ==


===
Footnotes ===


===
Citations ===


==
External links ==
Solo:
A Star Wars Story at StarWars.com
Solo: A Star Wars Story at Lucasfilm.com
Solo:
A Star Wars Story at IMDb
Solo:
A Star Wars Story on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Chewbacca (), nicknamed "Chewie", is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise.
He is a wookiee, a tall, hirsute, bipedal, intelligent species originating from the fictional planet of Kashyyyk.
Chewbacca is the loyal friend and first mate of Han Solo, and serves as co-pilot on Solo's spaceship, the Millennium Falcon; together they help the Rebel Alliance defeat the Galactic Empire and restore freedom to the galaxy.
In the original trilogy, Chewbacca is portrayed by Peter Mayhew.
Mayhew shares the role with his body double,
Joonas Suotamo, in the first episode of the sequel trilogy, Star Wars:
The Force Awakens.
Suotamo took over the role in the next episode, The Last Jedi, and reprised it in the anthology film Solo:
A Star Wars Story and the final sequel trilogy film, The Rise of Skywalker.
The character has also appeared in numerous works within the Expanded Universe, consisting of television series, books, comics, and video games.

==
Character ==
Chewbacca, a 200-year-old wookiee, becomes a young Han Solo's companion after they both escape Imperial captivity on Mimban.
After a series of adventures on Vandor and Kessel, Chewbacca embarks on the smuggling trade, serving as Han's co-pilot on the Millennium Falcon for the rest of Han's life.
Standing at eight feet tall, Chewbacca is covered with long hair and wears only a bandolier.
His weapon of choice is the Wookiee bowcaster (a crossbow-shaped directed-energy weapon).
Chewbacca speaks only in his native language, Shyriiwook (which sounds like animal sound growls); he is able to understand English, but is physically unable to speak it.

Chewbacca was named one of the "greatest sidekicks" in film history by Entertainment Weekly.

===
In other countries ===
In France, in the original Star Wars film, his name was changed to "Chiktabba" and his nickname to "Chiko", because the English name was similar to "chewing tobacco", which means in French "tabac à mâcher" or "tabac à chiquer", similar to "Chiquetabac".
In the other episodes, his name was "Chewbacca".

In the Italian-language editions, Chewbacca is named "Chewbecca" (Italian pronunciation: [ˈtʃubɛkka/ˈtʃubekka]) and is nicknamed "Chewbe" (Italian pronunciation: [ˈtʃuːbe]).
== Creation ==
Chewbacca's creation as a "gentle, hairy, non-English-speaking co-pilot" was inspired by George Lucas seeing his own dog sitting up on the passenger seat of his car.
It is said that Chewbacca's name is derived from собака (sobaka), the Russian word for dog.
In his first six screen appearances, Chewbacca was played by Peter Mayhew, who was chosen for his height of 7'3" (2.2 m).

Five similar costumes were created for Mayhew: in the three original films and a holiday special, the suits were made of yak hair and mohair.
In Revenge of the Sith (2005), the suit was made of more comfortable materials, though Mayhew's filming only lasted a day.
Only Mayhew's blue eyes could be seen in his costume, but fans easily recognize him by his gestures, and his co-workers claimed the ability to tell when a stand-in was taking his place.
For The Force Awakens, the role was also shared by Joonas Suotamo, who subsequently portrayed the character in later screen appearances after Mayhew's retirement.

Chewbacca's voice was created by the original films' sound designer, Ben Burtt, from recordings of walruses, lions, camels, bears, rabbits, tigers, and badgers in Burtt's personal menagerie.
The individual recordings were mixed at different ratios for Chewbacca's different utterances.
One of the most prominent elements in the voice was a black bear named Tarik, from Happy Hollow Zoo in San Jose, California.
The original costume was created by Stuart Freeborn and his wife Kay Freeborn, who hand knitted the torso section.
During preproduction of The Force Awakens, Creature Effects Supervisor Neal Scanlan commented that the original suit was far more sophisticated than they had originally realized, leading him to entirely scrap their first attempt at making the new suit, go back and study Freeborn's work in order to better appreciate how it worked, and attempt to emulate it.

==
Appearances ==


===
Skywalker saga ===


====
Original trilogy ====
First appearing in Star Wars (1977), Chewbacca and Han Solo accept a charter to take Luke Skywalker, Obi-Wan Kenobi, and droids C-3PO and R2-D2 to the planet Alderaan aboard their ship, the Millennium Falcon.
When they find the planet destroyed by the Death Star, the two smugglers help their passengers rescue Princess Leia and take her to the Rebel base on Yavin IV.
In the film's climactic battle scene, Chewbacca and Han save Luke from being killed by Darth Vader and give him time to destroy the Death Star.
In the film's final scene, Princess Leia acknowledges Chewbacca alongside Luke and Han.

In The Empire Strikes Back (1980), set three years later, Chewbacca tries to leave the Rebellion along with Han in order to repay Jabba, but is drawn back into the war when the Empire invaded the Rebel base on Hoth.
Chewbacca and the other protagonists seek refuge on Cloud City with Han's old friend Lando Calrissian, unaware that Lando has betrayed them to the Empire.
Chewbacca finds a dismantled C-3PO, blasted by an Imperial stormtrooper, in a junk pile, and rescues him from being melted down.
He tries to repair him, to no avail, shortly before Vader takes Chewbacca and the others prisoner.
Before Han is frozen in carbonite, he asks Chewbacca to look after Leia for him.
When Lando is able to save Leia and Chewbacca from being taken to Vader's ship, he uncuffs the Wookie, who upon release starts strangling him for selling them out.
When Lando explains that they still have a chance to save Han, Leia has Chewbacca stop choking him.
Even though they are unsuccessful at saving the frozen Han, they make it back to the Falcon with R2-D2.
Chewbacca carries C-3PO on his back throughout their escape to the Falcon.
When Leia hears Luke's cry for help, she has Chewbacca turn the ship around to rescue him.
In the film's final scene, Chewbacca joins the others in preparing to rescue Han from Jabba.

In Return of the Jedi (1983), Chewbacca pretends to be the prisoner of a bounty hunter named Boushh, who is actually Leia in disguise.
Chewbacca helps Leia, Luke and the others rescue Han and escape.
Later, he goes with the others to the forest moon of Endor on a mission to destroy the second Death Star's shield generator, and is instrumental in the mission's success by commandeering an AT-ST Walker.
At the end of the film, Chewbacca joins the other Rebels in celebrating the destruction of the Death Star and the downfall of the Empire.

====
Prequel
trilogy
====
In the 2005 prequel film Star Wars: Episode III – Revenge of the Sith, Chewbacca and Tarfful fight in the Clone Wars when their planet, Kashyyyk, is invaded by the Separatist Alliance.
They also help  Yoda escape the clone troopers that had been ordered to kill him.
Chewbacca is not identified until Yoda says goodbye to him at the end of a scene.

====
Sequel
trilogy ====
On April 7, 2014, it was confirmed that Mayhew would reprise his role as Chewbacca in Star Wars:
The Force Awakens.

In the film, set 30 years after Return of the Jedi, he and Han are piloting a cargo vessel and find the Millennium Falcon, which had been stolen from them.
Chewbacca and Han help the rogue First Order stormtrooper Finn, the scavenger Rey and the droid BB-8 escape from a gang of mercenaries on board the Falcon.
They then fly to Maz Kanata's castle so that Maz can help them get BB-8 to the Resistance.
Before Chewbacca and the others can get Maz's help, however, the First Order attacks the castle and captures Rey while Chewbacca, Finn, and Han are saved by X-wing pilots led by Poe Dameron.
Without Rey, they fly to a Resistance base, where Chewbacca and Han reunite with Leia, C-3PO, and R2-D2.
They also soon reunite with Rey, who escaped from the First Order.
Chewbacca helps in the fight between the Resistance and First Order.
When Han is killed by his son Kylo Ren during the battle, an enraged Chewbacca shoots Ren in the side, and sets off explosives that allow Poe and other X-wing pilots to destroy Starkiller Base, the First Order's superweapon.
Chewbacca shortly thereafter rescues Rey and Finn from the wilderness of Starkiller Base following their duel with Ren.
As Starkiller Base blows up, Chewbacca escapes in the Falcon with Finn and Rey, and later, along with R2-D2, helps Rey find Luke on the planet Ahch-To.

Chewbacca returns in Star Wars:
The Last Jedi, which takes place immediately after The Force Awakens.
He attempts to convince Luke to train Rey as a Jedi and defeat the First Order, though Luke refuses.
Chewbacca is seen in and around the Falcon throughout the Ahch-To scenes, where he develops a relationship with the planet's indigenous seabirds known as Porgs.
Later on, Chewbacca and Rey set off on the Falcon to Supreme Leader Snoke's Mega-class Star Dreadnought Supremacy, during Rey's attempt to turn Kylo Ren back to the light.
Chewbacca later helps the Resistance fight the First Order's fleet; he pilots the Falcon as part of a plan to distract the First Order TIE fighters.
After Rey and Luke defeat the First Order, Chewbacca is seen along with the rest of the Resistance as the Falcon flies away from the battle.

Chewbacca appears in The Rise of Skywalker, now played solely by Suotamo.
Chewbacca accompanies Rey, Finn, Poe, and C-3PO to the planet Passana, where they search for a clue to the location of a Sith Wayfinder.
With the help of Lando Calrissian, they locate the clue - a dagger with Sith inscriptions - but are quickly found by the First Order.
As Rey confronts Kylo Ren, Chewbacca, who has the dagger, is captured by the Knights of Ren and taken aboard a transport to the Resurgent-class Star Destroyer Steadfast.
Believing him to be on a different transport, Rey and Ren both use the Force to pull it down, with Rey accidentally using Force lightning to destroy the ship; Rey is deeply shaken when she believes she has killed Chewbacca, and his "death" motivates the others to continue the mission in his memory.
Chewbacca is in reality taken to the command ship, where he is questioned about his friends' whereabouts; Rey senses his presence when the ship arrives on Kijimi, and Finn and Poe stow aboard the ship to rescue him.
Later on, after Rey abandons them on Kef-Bir, they return to the Resistance base, where Chewbacca is distraught to learn of Leia's death.
He joins the Resistance in defeating and destroying the Sith Eternal forces.
He is last seen receiving Han's old medal (given to him in A New Hope) from Maz Kanata.
The medal is a token of gratitude for his long-term service to the rebellion as well as a memento through which to remember his fallen old friends Han, Luke and Leia.

===
Anthology films ===


====
Solo:
A Star Wars Story ====
Chewbacca appears in the 2018 anthology film Solo:
A Star Wars Story, which details his first meeting with Han.
He first appears as a "beast" captured by Imperials on the planet Mimban, where he is held captive in a small pit.
Han, considered a "troublemaker" by the other Imperials, is thrown into the pit and chained to Chewbacca to be eaten by the Wookiee.
Chewbacca emerges and attacks Han, but stops when Han reveals he can speak Shyriiwook.
They form an instant bond, and escape their captors.
They then decide to join the thief Tobias Beckett and his crew, who can free them.
Chewbacca later helps Han and Beckett's crew on their failed mission to steal coaxium for the Crimson Dawn crime syndicate.
Later, on Kessel, during an effort to retrieve more coaxium to make up for the amount lost during the previous mission, Chewbacca spots several other Wookiees being held as slaves, and manages to free them.
However, while making a choice whether to go with them or with Han, Chewbacca decides to assist Han instead, and helps him throughout the rest of the mission.
During the Kessel Run, in which Han decides to pilot the Millennium Falcon through a cloudy maelstrom to evade an Imperial blockade, Chewbacca reveals his piloting skills to Han.
Near the end of the movie, Beckett, now revealed to be a traitor, captures Chewbacca, Han saves Chewbacca and kills Beckett.
Han and Chewbacca then set off on more adventures in the Falcon.
===
Television ===


====
The Clone Wars ====
In the season 3 finale of Star Wars:
The Clone Wars, Chewbacca is captured by Trandoshan hunters, but is freed by Ahsoka Tano and agrees to help her and two younglings escape.
He builds a transmitter out of parts from the damaged Trandoshan ship, but it doesn't work.
Later, he and Ahsoka attack the Trandoshan fortress before they are found and assisted by other Wookiees, led by Tarfful.

===
Literature ===
In 2015, Marvel Comics published a five-issue miniseries titled Chewbacca written by Gerry Duggan and art by Phil Noto.
The comic is part of the canon developed subsequent to Disney's acquisition of Lucasfilm in 2012, and the end of Dark Horse Comics' publication of Star Wars comics.

===
Legends ===
In April 2014, most of the licensed Star Wars novels and comics produced since the originating 1977 film Star Wars were rebranded by Lucasfilm as Star Wars Legends and declared non-canon to the franchise.

====
Television ====
The 1978 television program
Star Wars Holiday Special introduces Chewbacca's family: Mallatobuck (his wife), Lumpawarrump (his son) and Attichitcuk, Chief of the Kaapauku Tribe (his father).
They live together on Kashyyyk.
The Star Wars Holiday Special consisted of a frame story in which  Chewbacca and Han must prevent Darth Vader from spoiling Life Day, and get home to be with Chewbacca's family.

====
Literature ====
Chewbacca appears in the Han Solo Adventures trilogy of books written by Brian Daley, including Han Solo at Stars' End, Han Solo's Revenge and Han Solo and the Lost Legacy, originally published between 1979 and 1980.

Chewbacca's family also appears in the non-canon Star Wars Legends books (Star Wars books published before December 2014), most notably The Wookiee Storybook, The Black Fleet Crisis trilogy by Michael P. Kube-McDowell, and The Hutt Gambit and Rebel Dawn by A. C. Crispin.
The latter also introduces other family members, including a sister named Kallabow and cousins named Dryanta and Jowdrrl, as well as the matriarch, Ellen.

In the novel Dark Lord: The Rise of Darth Vader, set just after the events in Star Wars Episode III: Revenge of the Sith, Chewbacca is forced to leave Kashyyyk after he narrowly escapes a major Imperial attack on the planet.
Darth Vader and Emperor Palpatine enslave most of Kashyyyk's population in order to build the Death Star.
To escape, Chewbacca joins a group of smugglers who are friendly to the Jedi.

The novel The Hutt Gambit explains how Chewbacca and Han first meet.
Han, a lieutenant in the Imperial Navy, finds him unconscious aboard a slave ship.
Han's commanding officer orders him to skin Chewbacca, but Han refuses and rescues the helpless prisoner.
Upon regaining consciousness, Chewbacca swears a "life-debt" to Han, and
the two become business partners and best friends.
In the novel Heirs of the Force, part of the Young Jedi Knights series, Chewbacca has a nephew, Kallabow's son named Lowbacca who goes to the Jedi Academy.

In the 1999 novel Vector Prime by R. A. Salvatore, the first in the New Jedi Order series, Chewbacca sacrifices his life to save Han's son Anakin from a collision between the planet Sernpidal and one of its moons.
Lumpawarrump and Lowbacca offer to assume Chewbacca's life debt to Han.

Chewbacca appears in the third book of the Origami Yoda series, The Secret of the Fortune Wookiee (in origami form) and in some of the subsequent books of the series.

Lucasfilm followed Vector Prime with a four-issue comic book titled Star Wars: Chewbacca, in which C-3PO and R2-D2 travel the galaxy to collect the stories of beings who knew or met the Wookiee.

====
Video games ====
In the fighting game
Star Wars: Masters of Teräs Käsi
, Chewbacca is a playable character.

In Star Wars Jedi Knight:
Jedi Academy, Chewbacca appears briefly at the Mos Eisley spaceport as an NPC, assisting Jaden Korr in disabling the tractor beams holding both the Millennium Falcon and the Raven's Claw captive.
In LucasArts' game Kinect Star Wars, the player acts as gunner on a spacecraft piloted by a young Chewbacca.

In Star Wars Battlefront II, Star Wars Battlefront:
Renegade Squadron and Star Wars Battlefront:
Elite Squadron, Chewbacca is a playable hero on the rebels side.

Chewbacca is a playable character in the Lego-themed video games Lego Star Wars: The Video Game, Lego Star Wars II:
The Original Trilogy, Lego Star Wars III:
The Clone Wars and Lego Star Wars:
The Force Awakens.

Chewbacca is featured as a playable character in the Death Star DLC from 2015's Star Wars: Battlefront, which came out in September of that year.
The character Chewbacca is also being made as an electronic handheld Bop It game to be released in Fall 2019.

== Reception ==
IGN has been fond of the character, choosing the character as the 9th top Star Wars character, listing his relationship with Han Solo as one of their top 10 movie bromances, claiming him as one of the characters they would like to see in The Clone Wars, and choosing him as one of the characters they would like to see in Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed and (along with Han)
its sequel.
UGO Networks listed the character as "one of the most bad-ass archers in popular culture.
"In
contrast, Roger Ebert in his 1997 review of the Special Edition re-release of The Empire Strikes Back declared that the character gave the worst performance of the film: "This character was thrown into the first film as window dressing, was never thought through, and as a result has been saddled with one facial expression and one mournful yelp.
Much more could have been done.
How can you be a space pilot and not be able to communicate in any meaningful way?
Does Han Solo really understand Chew's monotonous noises?
Do they have long chats sometimes?"
===
Awards ===
Chewbacca is one of the few fictional characters to receive a Lifetime Achievement Award at the 1997 MTV Movie Awards.
Because fans complained that he should have received a medal along with Luke and Han at the end of A New Hope, MTV presented the award as a medal bestowed by Carrie Fisher.
Peter Mayhew had voiced concern about Chewbacca being skipped in the original medal scene as well, but noted that Chewbacca does get the last "line" in the film as compensation.

==
Cultural impact ==


===
Chewbacca Mask Lady ===
The Chewbacca Mask Lady video is a viral video of a woman happily wearing a Chewbacca mask.

==
References ==


===
Footnotes ===


===
Citations ===


==
External links ==
Chewbacca in the StarWars.com Databank
Chewbacca on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Chewbacca on IMDb
Baron Landonis Balthazar "Lando" Calrissian III is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise.
In The Empire Strikes Back (1980), Lando is introduced as an old friend of Han Solo.
Prior to the events of the film, Lando made a career as a gambler, con artist, playboy, mining engineer, businessman, and was the owner of the Millennium Falcon until losing the ship to Han in a bet.
He has become the administrator of Cloud City on the gas planet Bespin, and in the film, reluctantly betrays Han to Darth Vader.
In Return of the Jedi (1983), he helps rescue Han from Jabba the Hutt and becomes a general in the Rebel Alliance and leads the attack on the second Death Star.
He is portrayed by Billy Dee Williams in the original trilogy, as well as The Rise of Skywalker (2019), marking one of the longest intervals between portrayals of a character by the same actor in American film history.
Donald Glover portrayed a younger version of the character in the standalone  Solo: A Star Wars Story (2018).
Lando also appears frequently in the Star Wars Expanded Universe of novels, comic books and video games, including a series of Legends novels.

The character has become one of the franchise's most popular, with Billy Dee Williams' performance receiving praise.
Donald Glover's performance in Solo was also well received, being hailed as one of the film's highlights.
Williams was nominated for the Saturn Award for Best Supporting Actor twice for his performances in The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi.

==
Appearances ==


===
Film ===
Lando is portrayed by Billy Dee Williams in The Empire Strikes Back (1980), Return of the Jedi (1983), and The Rise of Skywalker (2019), and was played by Donald Glover in the film Solo: A Star Wars Story (2018).
====
Original trilogy ====
Lando Calrissian first appears in The Empire Strikes Back as the administrator of Cloud City, an old friend of Han Solo (Harrison Ford), and the previous owner of Han's ship, the Millennium Falcon.
When Han, Princess Leia (Carrie Fisher), Chewbacca (Peter Mayhew), and C-3PO (Anthony Daniels) arrive at Cloud City, Lando welcomes them as guests of honor - only to betray them to Darth Vader (portrayed by David Prowse, voiced by James Earl Jones), who plans to use them as bait to ensnare Luke Skywalker (Mark Hamill).
Lando had reluctantly agreed to betray Han and company after Vader threatened to put Cloud City under the Galactic Empire's control if he refused.
Lando allows Vader to freeze Han in carbonite and give him to bounty hunter Boba Fett) (Jeremy Bulloch); when Vader takes Leia and Chewbacca prisoner, however, Lando's conscience gets the better of him, and in the ensuing evacuation of Cloud City he helps them escape in the Falcon.
He later assists in rescuing Luke from the underside of Cloud City.
Afterwards, he promises to help find Han.

In Return of the Jedi, Lando goes undercover to help Luke rescue Han from crime lord Jabba the Hutt.
During a battle with Jabba's henchmen, Han saves Lando from being devoured by the Sarlacc; Lando then helps Han and the others destroy Jabba's barge.
For his heroics, he is made a general in the Rebel Alliance.
Lando then takes the pilot chair in his old ship, the Millennium Falcon, and leads the attack on the second Death Star.
He leads the Rebel strike on the battle station, and personally destroys its power core, causing the station to explode.
He then joins the other Rebels on Endor in celebrating their victory and the end of the Empire.

====
Sequel
trilogy ====
Lando did not appear in the first film of the sequel trilogy, The Force Awakens (2015).
According to Williams, the reason Lando did not return may have been that he did not fit into the storyline.
His absence from the casting announcement caused the displeasure of some fans.
Lando was also absent from The Last Jedi (2017).
During the early development of the film, director Rian Johnson briefly considered bringing back Lando as the codebreaker that Resistance members Finn (John Boyega) and Rose Tico (Kelly Marie Tran) seek in the coastal city of Canto Bight, but Lando was finally written out of the film's script, with the codebreaker role ultimately going to Benicio del Toro's character
DJ.Lando finally reappeared in 2019's The Rise of Skywalker, marking one of the longest intervals between portrayals of a character by the same actor in American film history.
In the backstory to the film, in the years of peace after the Galactic Civil War, Lando attempted to start a family, and his daughter was born.
In the time they were together, he was a loving father, however when she was two years old, she vanished, kidnapped by unknown culprits.
In time, it became clear that the First Order was behind both her abduction and those of other children of former Rebel leaders.
After the tragedy of losing his daughter and his failure in a quest with Luke Skywalker to find answers about the growing darkness in the Force, Calrissian settled on the desert planet of Pasaana and adopted a life of solitude.

Lando first appears in The Rise of Skywalker on Pasaana, guiding Rey (Daisy Ridley), Poe Dameron (Oscar Isaac), Finn, and Chewbacca toward a clue for the whereabouts of the Sith wayfinder.
Poe asks Lando to aid the Resistance, but Lando refuses, saying he does not fly anymore, but sends his regards to Leia.
Lando reappears much later in the film, upon Leia's death, and he tells a grieving Poe that he, Luke, Leia, and Han were similarly unprepared when they were fighting the Empire, but that they were able to succeed because they had each other.
This inspires Poe to launch an offensive against the forces of the Sith Eternal, with Lando traveling the galaxy to recruit Rebel veterans and other supporters of the Resistance's cause to help in the final battle.
Just as the Resistance appears most overwhelmed in the battle, Lando, Chewbacca, and Wedge Antilles (Denis Lawson) arrive in the Millennium Falcon alongside a massive fleet of Resistance sympathizers, allies, and veterans, and they help to win the battle and the war.
At the end of the film, as the galaxy is celebrating the Resistance's victory, Jannah (Naomi Ackie), a former stormtrooper, approaches Lando and says she does not know where she is from; he tells her that they will find out together.

====
Anthology films ====
Donald Glover portrays a young Lando Calrissian in Solo:
A Star Wars Story, which takes place before the original trilogy.
Glover had the opportunity to speak with Billy Dee Williams and seek his input. "
He said, 'Just be charming'.
Which is the best advice."
Williams had expressed interest in making a cameo appearance (though likely as another character) in the film, but he did not ultimately appear.
Lando is introduced as a gambler and "retired" smuggler who owns a ship fast enough for Han (Alden Ehrenreich) and his associates to use in stealing a load of raw starship fuel.
Han tries to win the ship (the Millennium Falcon) from him in a game of sabacc, but Lando cheats and cleans Han out.
However, Lando agrees to join the team in exchange for a percentage of the profits from the mission.
During the heist and subsequent escape, Lando is injured and his droid co-pilot L3-37 is irreparably damaged, but Han brings the Falcon to safety with help from L3's navigational database after he hotwires it into the ship's computer.
Lando later takes the Falcon and abandons the team, but Han tracks him down and wins it from him in another game of sabacc, having stolen the card Lando had up his sleeve to let him cheat.

Kathleen Kennedy said, in a statement, that a film focusing on Lando Calrissian could happen, but it would not be a priority at the time.

===
Television series ===
Billy Dee Williams returned to the role in the Star Wars Rebels episodes "Idiot's Array" and "The Siege of Lothal".
In "Idiot's Array", Lando wins Chopper (voiced by Dave Filoni), the repair droid of the crew of the Ghost, in a game of sabacc, forcing the crew to assist him with a dangerous smuggling run to get their droid back.
The crew become Lando's reluctant business partners following the ordeal, leading to their first encounter with the crime boss Azmorigan (voiced by James Hong).
In "The Siege of Lothal", the crew of the Ghost approach Lando for help in getting off of Lothal, which is under Imperial occupation.
He is also mentioned on occasion in various other episodes, becoming one of a couple of aliases employed by series protagonist Ezra Bridger (voiced by Taylor Gray).

Lucasfilm is developing Lando, a series centering on the character for Disney+, with a story by Justin Simien.
It has not been confirmed whether Billy Dee Williams or Donald Glover will be portraying Lando.

===
Video games ===
Billy Dee Williams reprises his role as Lando Calrissian in various games, including as a playable character in Star Wars Battlefront and Battlefront II.
Only the second game narrates a continuous story.

===
Comics ===
Lando Calrissian is the lead character in Marvel Comics' Lando, a five-issue miniseries published in 2015.
Lando has a brief appearance in the comic miniseries Shattered Empire published by Marvel Comics in 2015.
Lando is also the lead character in the comic Lando:
Double or Nothing, a five-issue miniseries released in 2018.

===
Books ===
The novel Star Wars:
Last Shot reveals that between Return of the Jedi and The Force Awakens, Lando is considering settling down with a Twi'lek girlfriend.

===
Legends media ===
Legends novels, comics, and video games are not considered canonical to the films.
With the 2012 acquisition of Lucasfilm by The Walt Disney Company, most of the licensed Star Wars novels and comics produced since the originating 1977 film Star Wars were rebranded as Star Wars Legends and declared non-canon to the franchise in April
2014.The Star Wars comic book series released by Marvel Comics featured Lando as a prominent character following The Empire Strikes Back.
In the comic series, he has a crime lord nemesis named Drebble, and Lando frequently made use of his foil's name as a cover identity so that any animosity he generates while using the alias will be brought against the real Drebble, not Lando himself.

This eventually backfires when "Drebble's" exploits are recognized by the Rebellion and Lando—being the only person who knows of him—has to present the real Drebble with an award for his own activities.

Lando is a supporting character in Legends novels that took place after Return of the Jedi commonly depicted Lando as getting involved in a variety of entrepreneurial schemes, including Nomad City in Timothy Zahn's Thrawn trilogy and the Kessel Spice Mines in the works of Kevin J. Anderson.
During The Corellian Trilogy, Lando goes on a galaxy-wide hunt for a rich wife, ultimately marrying Tendra Risant.
With his in-laws' money and his entrepreneurial abilities, he opens a mining facility on the outer rim planet of Dubrillion.
In The New Jedi Order and beyond, Lando continues being a valuable ally and friend to the Skywalker/Solo family.
In Fury, the seventh novel of the Legacy of the Force series, Lando announces to Han and Leia that he and Tendra are having a child.

Kevin J. Anderson stated that Lucasfilm toyed with the idea of killing off Lando, noting the character had run his course for Expanded Universe authors in the 1990s.

====
The Lando Calrissian Adventures ====
The Lando Calrissian Adventures is a 1983 trilogy of science fiction novels by L. Neil Smith.
Set in the Star Wars Expanded Universe, the novels chronicle Lando's smuggling days before the events of the original Star Wars trilogy.

The series has been described as "space pulp", and highlights the differences between Lando and Han Solo.
The books were released in July, October, and December 1983, and were the first Star Wars books released since The Han Solo Adventures (1979–1980); both trilogies were originally published by Del Rey, a division of Ballantine Books.
They were also among the last novels in the franchise until Timothy Zahn's Thrawn trilogy was released in the early 1990s.

The series is set 3–2 years before the original Star Wars film, and is brought into chronological context with the rest of the Expanded Universe in Rebel Dawn  (1998), the final book of A. C. Crispin's Han Solo Trilogy.

The novelization of Solo: A Star Wars Story makes reference to the events of the first book as a previous adventure of Lando's, which he recounts while composing his autobiographical "Calrissian Chronicles".
He further estimates that it will be the first in a trilogy of his adventures.
Lando Calrissian and the Mindharp of Sharu is the first novel in Smith's Lando Calrissian trilogy, published by Del Rey on 1 July 1983.
It is noted as being more of a psychedelic fantasy novel than hard science fiction.

The book begins shortly after Lando wins the Millennium Falcon in a game of sabacc, as well as a robot which must be picked up in the Rafa system.
Upon the planet of Rafa IV, convicts are made to harvest mind-draining 
"life-crystals" which prolong the life of elite citizens.
Lando is arrested and brought before the colony's corrupt governor and the sorcerer Rokur Gepta, who will let him keep his life and liberty if he can locate the legendary Mindharp of the ancient and long-lost Sharu civilization.
The Mindharp is revealed to be kept inside a multidimensional pyramid with mind-altering properties, which provides a strange adventure for the daring Lando.
Lando Calrissian and the Flamewind of Oseon is the second novel in the trilogy, published on 1 October 1983.
After selling a load of life-crystals, and accompanied by his droid Vuffi Raa, Lando attempts a career as an honest freighter captain.
After some bad luck, he is soon nostalgic for his old trade.
Fortunately, he is invited to a sabacc game on Oseon celebrating an event called Flamewind, but is followed by Rokur Gepta.
After an explosion rocks the hull of the Falcon, they safely land.
During the sabacc game, Lando is distracted by the apparent sabotage of his ship, and is assaulted.
He comes under trial for having a weapon, illegal on the planet.
He is offered a smuggling deal as an alternative to execution.

Lando Calrissian and the Starcave of ThonBoka is the third novel, published on 1 December 1983.
Nearly a year after Lando and Vuffi Raa have left the Oseon system, while traveling in deep space they encounter Lehesu, a vacuum-breathing creature.
Able to establish communication, they find out he is also on an adventure away from his home, the ThonBoka nebula.
A month later, Lando and Raa receive word that ThonBoka is under attack from the Imperial Centrality Navy.
Lehesu's exploration of the Centrality apparently provoked the attack on his species.
Lando and Raa rush to assist their friend.

The Imperial blockade makes Lando nervous, but he cons his way through the fleet.
When the Millennium Falcon strays from its course and is ordered to return, they dump explosives and go into hyperspace to fake the Falcon's destruction.
Meanwhile, Rokur Gepta forms an alliance with a confederate squadron.
Lando and Raa reunite with Lehesu, and hear of a negotiation attempt which only results in an outbreak of battle.
The vacuum-breathing creatures use their projection and hyperspace abilities to fool the Imperial Navy, which fires on its allied ships.
As Vuffi Raa pilots the Falcon, Lando engages the enemy in battle from the quad-gun in one of their last adventures before Raa is resummoned to his original programming.

====
Video games ====
Williams reprised his role as Lando in Legends videogame Star Wars: Jedi Knight II:
Jedi Outcast.

In Lego Star Wars: The Complete Saga, Calrissian is an unlockable playable character, having the characteristic of being able to kiss Leia's hand if she is nearby.
Lando is also a playable character in the multiplayer aspect of the 2017 game Star Wars: Battlefront II.

==
Concept and creation ==


===
Development ===
During development of the character, the original teaser trailer for The Empire Strikes Back introduced him as Landau Calrissian rather than his final name of Lando.

Actor Yaphet Kotto was an early choice for the role of Lando Calrissian, but chose to appear in the prison drama Brubaker instead.
In writing The Empire Strikes Back, Lucas initially considered that Lando Calrissian was a clone from a planet of clones which caused the Clone Wars mentioned in the original Star Wars film.
Lando's cane in The Rise of Skywalker was designed to resemble Cloud City.
It is inscribed "Baron Lando Calrissian".
===
Portrayal ===
In 2018, The Verge noted that despite Han Solo's first name being written as "Han" and franchise creator George Lucas also pronouncing the name as "Han" (hæn) off-screen, within the films most characters, including Luke Skywalker, pronounce it as "Hahn" (hɑn).
The Verge also noted how Billy Dee Williams' Lando seems to be the only character to pronounce it as "Han" like Lucas, and that when, in The Empire Strikes Back, Lando is choked by Chewbacca for betraying Han, Lando causes most other characters to shift to "Han."
In Solo: A Star Wars Story, Glover decided to deliberately use "Han" instead of "Hahn" in order to honor the character's trait.
Ahead of the release of Solo: A Star Wars Story, co-writer Jonathan Kasdan suggested that Lando is pansexual and stated, "There's a fluidity to Donald and Billy Dee's [portrayal of Lando's] sexuality ...
I would have loved to have gotten a more explicitly LGBT character into this movie.
I think it's time, certainly, for that, and I love the fluidity ―
sort of the spectrum of sexuality that Donald appeals to and
that droids are a part of.
He doesn't make any hard and fast rules.
"
When asked about a scene where L3-37 jokes about Lando's being flirtatious towards Han, writer Lawrence Kasdan said, "That is her personality.
Maybe it means something, maybe it doesn't.
"
When asked about Lando's pansexuality, Donald Glover stated, "There's so many things to have sex with. ...
I feel like if you're in space
it's kind of like, the door is open!"
Writing for The Verge, Megan Farokhmanesh criticized Jonathan Kasdan's assertion that Lando is pansexual as "a piss-poor shot at representation", and argued that Kasdan was conflating pansexuality with promiscuity.
Farokhmanesh compared the assertion to J. K. Rowling's statement that her character Albus Dumbledore is gay, despite no Harry Potter media depicting this.
In 2019, Billy Dee Williams criticized the decision as well, blaming Solo's underperformance at the box office on its focus on this "topical" issue.

== Reception ==
Author Adilufu Nama wrote in 2008 that Lando "offered a new benchmark in the status of black representation in science fiction cinema".
According to Alyssa Rosenberg of The Washington Post, Lando is a "fascinating and fraught part of the 'Star Wars' legacy and the conversation around race in science fiction".
She added that "Lando's the only character in 'Star Wars' with a truly comfortable sense of style."
On his portrayal, she wrote, "One of Williams's accomplishments in 'Empire' and 'Return of the Jedi' is how much he [feels] like an old-fashioned movie star in a futuristic setting without making the performance seem incongruous.
"Lando
Calrissian was chosen as the 11th best Star Wars character by IGN and the 12th best Star Wars hero by IGN's Jesse Schedeen, who also said that he was one of the characters he would most like to see in Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed.
In 2015, Billy Dee Williams publicly admitted that he received backlash from children who were angered by Lando's betrayal of Han Solo in The Empire Strikes Back.
Williams felt that the situation would have been different if Lando had been played by a white actor.
Williams wrote that "Lando is not black or white, he's just Lando.
Above and beyond the arguments or discussions of bygone eras, he is of the future."
He further stated,

The one thing I always find myself explaining is that Lando didn't betray Han and his friends.
He was dealing, as best he could, with a situation that was presented to him by the Empire upon their arrival.
One of the most amusing moments for me was that Lando decided to challenge Darth Vader (for about three seconds) until he realized that maybe he'd better back down and figure out another way to save his friends.

===
In popular culture ===
A Kenner Lando Calrissian action figure appears among Elliot's toys in E.T.
the Extra-Terrestrial.

In Something, Something Dark Side
and It's A Trap!,
Family Guy's parodies of The Empire
Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi
, Mort Goldman served as a stand-in for Lando Calrissian.

In the TV series Timeless season 2 episode 22 ("The King of the Delta Blues," 4/22/18)
Connor Mason (Paterson Joseph) uses Lando Calrissian as his alias and stands in as the technician for the legendary recording session with Robert Johnson; when he returns to the present, his record dust jacket has Lando Calrissian listed as the recording technician.
== Notes ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Lando Calrissian in the StarWars.com Databank
Lando Calrissian on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Lando Calrissian on IMDb
Maul, known as Darth Maul during his time as a Sith, is a fictional character and a major antagonist in the Star Wars franchise.
He was originally introduced in the 1999 film Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace (played by Ray Park and voiced by Peter Serafinowicz) as a powerful Zabrak warrior and Darth Sidious' first apprentice.
Though seemingly killed by Obi-Wan Kenobi at the end of the film, he returned in the 2008 Star Wars: The Clone Wars animated television series, and has since also been featured in the 2014 series Star Wars Rebels and the 2018 film Solo:
A Star Wars Story, voiced by Sam Witwer, with Park physically reprising the role in the latter film.
Throughout his appearances, Maul has been portrayed as a disgraced Sith Lord who renounced his "Darth" title after realizing Sidious never cared about him; a powerful crime lord; and Obi-Wan's relentless archenemy.

The Clone Wars explores more of the character's backstory, revealing he was once a member of a group of Zabrak warriors on Dathomir, and was abducted by Sidious as a child.
Following his defeat in The Phantom Menace, Maul is driven to insanity and becomes a cyborg, but is rescued by his brother Savage Opress during the Clone Wars.
After being given a new pair of robotic legs, Maul carries out his revenge plan, culminating with him allying with various crime syndicates, taking over the planet Mandalore and killing Obi-Wan's love interest, Duchess Satine Kryze.
Although he is captured by his former master Sidious, who came to see him as a rival, he manages to escape and rebuild his criminal empire.
Following his overthrow and capture by the Galactic Republic, Maul escapes once again and goes into hiding.
During the reign of the Galactic Empire, Maul resurfaces as a crime lord and runs his syndicate, the Crimson Dawn, from the shadows, but is eventually stranded on the Sith world of Malachor.
He escapes years later, after meeting Ezra Bridger, whom he forces to assist in locating Obi-Wan.
Upon tracking him on Tatooine, Maul fights his old nemesis in one final confrontation and dies in Kenobi's arms.

Aside from the films and television series, the character appears in various canon and non-canon Star Wars media over the years, such as books, comics, and video games.
Since the release of The Phantom Menace, Maul has become a widely recognized figure in popular culture, widely remembered for his intimidating appearance and double-bladed lightsaber.
His popularity within the Star Wars fandom has earned him a cult status.

==
Characteristics ==


===
Concept and creation ===
After getting frustrated with a drawing by The Phantom Menace production designer Gavin Bocquet, concept artist Iain McCaig started covering it in tape.
Both he and director George Lucas liked the result, described as "a kind of Rorschach pattern".
The final drawing had McCaig's own face, with the skin removed, and some Rorschach experimentation (dropping ink onto paper, folding it in half then opening).
Maul's facial tattoos were inspired by the indigenous peoples of Brazil.
Maul is described as a thing of nightmares when his art design is finished.

Darth Maul's head originally had feathers, based on prayer totems, but the Creature Effects crew led by Nick Dudman interpreted those feathers as horns, modifying his features into those common in popular depictions of the devil.
His clothing was also modified, from a tight body suit with a muscle pattern to the Sith robe based on samurai pleats, because the lightsaber battles involved much jumping, spinning, running, and rolling.
Another concept had Maul a masked figure, something that could rival Darth Vader, while the senatorial characters would sport painted and tattooed faces.
It was later decided to apply the painted and tattooed faces to Maul rather than the senator.

===
Portrayal ===
Darth Maul was physically portrayed by actor and martial artist Ray Park in The Phantom Menace.
The character was voiced by actor Peter Serafinowicz in The Phantom Menace and Lego video game adaptation of the prequel trilogy, while Sam Witwer performed the character's voice in the animated series The Clone Wars, Rebels, and in the live action movie Solo:
A Star Wars Story.
Actors Gregg Berger, Jess Harnell, Stephen Stanton, Clint Bajakian, and David W. Collins have all voiced him in Legends adaptations and minor appearances.

==
Appearances ==


===
Films ===


====
The Phantom Menace ====
In his first appearance, in Star Wars:
Episode
I –
The Phantom Menace, Darth Maul is ordered by his master Darth Sidious (Ian McDiarmid) to capture Queen Padmé Amidala (Natalie Portman) of Naboo in order to force her to sign a treaty that would legitimize the Trade Federation's invasion of the planet, thus making him the central antagonist.
Maul manages to track down her starship to Tatooine, where he briefly duels Jedi Master Qui-Gon Jinn (Liam Neeson), who was assigned to protect the Queen, near the ship's landing zone, but Qui-Gon ultimately escapes aboard the ship.
He soon concludes that Maul is a Sith Lord and informs the Jedi Council on Coruscant, thus revealing the return of the Sith, who were thought to be extinct for over a millennium.
Later, Maul is sent to Naboo to assist the Trade Federation when they face hostile opposition from the Queen and her men, and once again duels Qui-Gon, along with his apprentice Obi-Wan Kenobi (Ewan McGregor).
Ultimately, Maul is able to mortally wound Qui-Gon and knock Obi-Wan down into a shaft, but the latter uses the Force to propel himself out of the pit, and equip himself with Qui-Gon's lightsaber to bisect Maul, sending the two parts of his body falling down the shaft.

====
Solo:
A Star Wars Story ====
Ray Park reprised his role as Maul in Solo:
A Star Wars Story, with Sam Witwer providing the voice, the latter reprising the role from the animated series Star Wars: The Clone Wars and Star Wars Rebels.
At the end of the film, Maul is revealed to have become the master of the crime syndicate Crimson Dawn, to which crime lord Dryden Vos (Paul Bettany) answers.
Smuggler Qi'ra (Emilia Clarke) tells Maul that Vos and his men were killed by Tobias Beckett (Woody Harrelson) and his accomplices, but neglects to mention Han Solo (Alden Ehrenreich) and Chewbacca (Joonas Suotamo).
Maul commands her to meet with him on Dathomir and tells her that they will work more closely from that point forward, igniting his lightsaber.

==== Scrapped sequel trilogy appearance ====
In George Lucas's unused outlines for the Star Wars sequel trilogy, the cybernetic Maul would have been "the godfather of crime in the universe" and the master of Darth Talon; these two would have functioned as the primary two villains of the trilogy.

===
Animated series ===


====
The Clone Wars ====
Darth Maul's origins are elaborated upon in the third season of the animated series Star Wars:
The Clone Wars, which takes place between Attack of the Clones and Revenge of the Sith.
Maul is explained to have been a warrior of the Nightbrother clan on the planet Dathomir inhabited by the dominant Nightsister witchcraft society led by Mother Talzin, who is later established to be Maul's biological mother.
Maul's tattoos are described as the markings of a warrior.
The series introduces Maul's brothers, Savage and Feral Opress, the former of whom is eventually sent by Talzin to find Maul, revealed to still be alive after the events of The Phantom Menace.
George Lucas decided to resurrect Maul for the series after developing Savage Opress.
Series co-creator Dave Filoni initially responded to Lucas's idea as unrealistic, because, "It's over.
He's cut in half.
How does that work?"
According to Filoni, Lucas replied, "I don't know.
Figure it out.
"In
the fourth season, it is revealed that, after his defeat at Obi-Wan's hands, Maul ended up on the junkyard planet of Lotho Minor via a dumpster craft, where he has built himself a six-legged apparatus to survive.
Almost twelve years since Maul was presumed dead, Savage arrives on Lotho Minor looking for his brother, whom he finds is suffering from amnesia and dementia.
Savage brings Maul to Dathomir, where Talzin restores his mind and gives him a pair of robotic legs.
Maul and Savage then set about a plan to exact revenge on Obi-Wan.
Maul proceeds to attack a colonial village to draw Obi-Wan there and make an attempt on his life, only to be thwarted due to Asajj Ventress' unexpected appearance to collect a bounty on Savage.
Maul and Savage overpower Obi-Wan and Ventress, but Maul lets them go, deciding to await another opportunity.
In the fifth season, Maul takes Savage as his apprentice, and begins building a criminal empire.
Needing followers, they travel to Florrum and manage to convince Weequay pirate Jiro and his crew to join them and betray their leader Hondo Ohnaka.
Maul's pirates attack Hondo's loyal forces, and Maul
once again duels Obi-Wan while Savage fights and kills Jedi Master Adi Gallia.
Obi-Wan draws the two brothers away from the pirates, and manages to cut off Savage's arm.
While Maul and Savage are in the process of retreating, Hondo's crew open fire at them, shooting off one of Maul's robotic legs, and destroying their ship as it takes off, though the brothers manage to escape in an emergency pod.
After several days, they are found floating in dead space and close to death by the Mandalorian Death Watch warriors, led by Pre Vizsla.
They are taken back to Vizsla's settlement, and Maul's damaged cybernetic legs are replaced with a new prosthetic that resembles a more humanoid form, while Savage is fitted with a mechanical arm.
Maul offers Vizsla the chance to reclaim Mandalore by recruiting the Black Sun, the Pyke Syndicate, and the Hutt Cartel to create the criminal syndicate called the Shadow Collective.

From there, Maul engineers Vizsla's rise to power: he orders his henchmen to attack Mandalore so the Death Watch can arrest them and appear as heroes to the denizens who have long lived under Duchess Satine Kryze's pacifist rule.
However, Vizsla betrays and imprisons Maul and Savage, though they easily break free, and the former challenges Vizsla to a fight for leadership of Mandalore.
Maul overpowers Vizsla, beheading him with his own darksaber, and effectively takes over Mandalore, putting disgraced former Prime Minister Almec, whom Satine had imprisoned for corruption, in power as a puppet leader.
However, a faction of Death Watch, led by Bo-Katan Kryze, refuse to accept an outsider as their leader, and escape to plan a coup.
Maul later masterminds a trap for Obi-Wan, knowing that Satine will contact the Jedi Master for help because their romantic past.
When Obi-Wan arrives on Mandalore, he is quickly captured and forced to watch as Maul executes Satine.
Obi-Wan is later freed by Bo-Katan's Death Watch faction.

Meanwhile, Darth Sidious learns of Maul's survival and the power he has accumulated, and, fearing that his former apprentice may challenge him, travels to Mandalore to address the matter.
After a lightsaber duel against Maul and Savage, Sidious easily kills the latter, enraging Maul, who briefly holds his own against Sidious, but is ultimately defeated.
Sidious proceeds to torture Maul with Force lightining, while revealing that he has no intention of killing his former apprentice and that he has other uses for him.

Maul returns in the seventh season, following the events of the comic book Darth Maul: Son of Dathomir.
He still leads the Shadow Collective, albeit the Hutts have abandoned his cause, and rules over Mandalore, until Bo-Katan enlists the Galactic Republic's help in deposing him.
During the "Siege of Mandalore" story arc (which is set during Revenge of the Sith), Bo-Katan's Death Watch faction and a branch of the 501st Clone Legion, led by Ahsoka Tano and Commander Rex, lead an assault on Maul's Mandalorian forces to draw him out of hiding.
Unbeknowst to them, Maul has foreseen the events that are about to unfold, and orders his Shadow Collective lieutenants to go into hiding, warning them of Galactic Empire that will be created.
While confronting Ahsoka, Maul shares his visions with her, revealing that Darth Sidious will destroy both the Republic and the Jedi Order, and invites her to join him so that they may stand a chance to stop him.
However, when Maul also reveals that Ahsoka's former master, Anakin Skywalker, will be turned to the dark side by Sidious, and that he had hoped to kill Anakin to prevent this from happening, Ahsoka engages Maul in a duel, which ends with the latter's capture.
Maul is subsequently imprisoned in a Mandalorian device that renders his Force powers useless, and set to be taken to Coruscant to stand trial, but en route to the planet, Sidious executes Order 66, causing clone troopers from all across the galaxy to turn on and try to execute their Jedi generals.
Maul is almost killed himself, but Ahsoka, who survived her clones' attempt on her life, rescues him, so that he may serve as a distraction while she and Rex try to escape.
However, during his rampage, Maul destroys the ship's hyperdrive, causing it to crash on a nearby moon.
He then betrays Ahsoka and steals her shuttle to escape, though Ahsoka and Rex also manage to escape from the ship before it crashes.

====
Rebels ====
An older Maul appears in the season two finale of Star Wars Rebels, which takes place between Solo and A New Hope.
Tracked by an Imperial Inquisitor called the Eighth Brother, Maul is stranded on the ancient Sith world of Malachor, where he is discovered among the ruins by series protagonist Ezra Bridger.
Introducing himself as an "old master" and seeking revenge against Sidious, Maul wins Ezra's trust by denouncing the Sith.
He encourages the boy to use the dark side, and leads him into an ancient Sith temple, where they discover a holocron that Maul claims can give them the knowledge needed to defeat the Sith.
After recovering it, the two find Ezra's master Kanan Jarrus and Ahsoka Tano locked in battle with the Eighth Brother, as well as the Fifth Brother and the Seventh Sister.
Maul—having cast aside the title of Darth—reveals a new lightsaber disguised as a walking stick and joins the Jedi in battling the Inquisitors.

After the Inquisitors retreat, Maul suggests to the Jedi that they team up, telling them that he cannot defeat Darth Vader on his own.
Although Kanan and Ahsoka do not trust him, they only cooperate upon the insistence of Ezra.
Once all three Inquisitors are killed, Maul turns on the Jedi, revealing his intention to take Ezra as his apprentice and that he tricked him into activating the temple.
After blinding Kanan with his lightsaber, Maul briefly duels Ahsoka and then the now-blind Kanan, who knocks him off the temple's edge.
However, he survives the fall and escapes Malachor in the Eighth Brother's TIE fighter.

In the third season, Maul takes the Ghost's crew hostage and threatens to kill them unless Kanan and Ezra bring both the Sith and Jedi holocrons to him.
Maul takes the crew to a remote base in the Outer Rim where he awaits Kanan and Ezra's arrival.
He lures Kanan away from Ezra, and makes an attempt on his life.
Afterwards, Maul and Ezra hazardously unite the holocrons, allowing them to see visions of their desires: Ezra sees images of a way to destroy the Sith, images including "twin suns", while Maul sees a vision of his own.
Kanan begs Ezra to look away before he sees too much of the dark side, while Maul tells him to ignore Kanan and keep looking.
Ezra heeds his master's words and breaks off the connection, which causes a great explosion.
Maul escapes in the confusion, uttering, "He lives."

Maul returns after finding the rebels' secret base.
He tells Ezra that because the connection was severed, they got bits and pieces of each other's visions.
After the holocrons were destroyed, Maul discovered another way to get the information he needed.
He travels to Dathomir with Ezra, and recreates a Nightsister spell to temporarily meld his and Ezra's minds, which leads them to realize that they are both looking for Obi-Wan Kenobi.
However, in return for the provided answers, the Nightsister spirits demand a sacrifice, and possess Kanan and Sabine Wren when they arrive to rescue Ezra.
After escaping from them, Maul makes Ezra one final offer to become his apprentice, and leaves him behind to try and rescue his friends after he refuses.

Eventually, Maul tracks down Obi-Wan to Tatooine, but gets lost in the desert, and decides to use Ezra to lure his old nemesis out of hiding.
His plan is ultimately successful as he tracks Ezra's movement, who came to find and warn Obi-Wan of Maul, until he is rescued by the Jedi Master.
As Ezra is ushered away by Obi-Wan, Maul threatens his old enemy, and quickly deduces that he is not only hiding, but is protecting someone.
Realizing that he cannot allow Maul to escape with this information, Obi-Wan ignites his lightsaber and prepares to duel Maul, who is swiftly defeated in a few strikes.
As he lies dying in Obi-Wan's arms, Maul asks if the person he is protecting is the "Chosen One", and Obi-Wan replies that he is.
Maul declares that this "Chosen One" will avenge them and dies.

===
Comics ===


====
Darth Maul ====
In 2017, Marvel released Star Wars:
Darth Maul, a 5-issue prequel series centered on Darth Maul before the events of The Phantom Menace.
The comic details upon Maul's training under Darth Sidious, and how he was manipulated into hating the Jedi for leading the Sith to near-extinction.
The main plot follows Maul's quest to kill his first Jedi, allying himself with several bounty hunters and facing a crime lord along the way.

====
Age of the Republic ====
Darth Maul had his own one-shot comic book within the 2018–19 Age of the Republic miniseries, which depicts short stories of various characters during the Galactic Republic era.
In his story, Maul poses as a member of a criminal cartel to kill a Force-sensitive thief for Darth Sidious, and experiences a vision of an alternate life as a peace-keeping Jedi, which he denies, much to Sidious' content.
The story takes place shortly before the The Phantom Menace.

====
Darth Maul: Son of Dathomir ====
Dark Horse Comics produced Darth Maul: Son of Dathomir based on the scripts and storyboards of an unproduced four-episode story arc intended for the seventh season of The Clone Wars.
The events of the comic are set some time after Maul's defeat at Darth Sidious' hands in the fifth season of the television series, and before his eventual return in the seventh season.

After defeating Maul and killing his brother Savage Opress, Sidious takes him to a Separatist prison, where Count Dooku tortures him for information about the Shadow Collective.
Prime Minister Almec arranges Maul's escape and the latter then heads back to Zanbar to command the Death Watch army.
However, he is followed by General Grievous and his droids, who battle with Maul and the Mandalorians.
While they put up a fierce fight, Maul and his minions are ultimately overwhelmed by the droids.
During the battle, Maul tears through the droid ranks and attacks Grievous, but is overpowered and forced to retreat.
Afterwards, Maul confers with Mother Talzin  and plots to draw out Sidious by capturing Dooku and Grievous.
The scheme works, and Talzin is able to restore herself to her physical form, but she sacrifices herself to save Maul.
Although Maul escapes with a company of loyal Mandalorians, the Shadow Collective has disintegrated due to the conflict with Sidious, as the Hutts, Pykes, and Black Sun have all abandoned Maul.

===
Novels ===


====
Ahsoka ====
In flashbacks during the novel Star Wars: Ahsoka, it is revealed that during the final days of the Clone Wars, Maul and his forces were besieged on Mandalore by an army of clone troopers led by Ahsoka Tano and Captain Rex.
During the siege, Maul confronts and duels Ahsoka, and though he proves to be the stronger fighter, the former Jedi outwits him and traps him in a ray shield.
However, before Maul can be taken into official custody, Order 66 is enacted and the clone troopers following Ahsoka turn on her, with the exception of Rex.
With Rex's life in peril, Ahsoka abandons the chance of killing Maul, allowing the former Sith to escape once again.

The events of this battle were later adapted for the seventh season of The Clone Wars.

===
Video games ===
Darth Maul has been featured in a number of Star Wars games, as a boss or a playable character.

Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace (1999)
Star Wars:
Jedi Power Battles (2000)
Star Wars: Demolition (2000)
Star Wars: Super Bombad Racing (2001)
Star Wars: Obi-Wan (2001)
Star Wars: Galactic Battegrounds (2001)
Tony Hawk's Pro Skater 3 (2001)
- Maul appears as a guest character via a licensing deal.

Star Wars: Racer Revenge (2002)
Lego Star Wars: The Video Game (2005)
Star Wars: Battlefront II (2005)
Lego Star Wars II:
The Original Trilogy (2006) - Maul can be unlocked as a playable character only if the player has a save game of the first Lego Star Wars game on their memory card.

Lego Star Wars:
The Complete Saga (2007)
Star Wars Battlefront: Renegade Squadron (2007)
Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed (2008) - the shape-shifting droid PROXY takes on the form of Darth Maul while fighting Starkiller; Maul is also available as an in-game "skin" for Starkiller via downloadable content.

Star Wars Battlefront:
Elite Squadron (2009)
Clone Wars Adventures (2010)
Lego Star Wars III:
The Clone Wars (2011)
Disney Infinity 3.0 (2015)
Galaxy of Heroes (2015)
Force Arena (2017)
Star Wars Battlefront II
(2017)
Lego Star Wars:
The Skywalker Saga (2021)Maul would have been the main character of Battle of the Sith Lords, an action-adventure title set before The Phantom Menace that was cancelled in 2011.

===
Legends ===
With the 2012 acquisition of Lucasfilm by The Walt Disney Company, most of the licensed Star Wars novels and comics produced since the originating 1977 film Star Wars were rebranded as Star Wars Legends and declared non-canon to the franchise in April 2014.

====
Comics ====
Darth Maul is a 4-issue comics series published by Dark Horse Comics featuring Darth Maul.

The series is set in the shortly before the Battle of Naboo in Episode I – The Phantom Menace.

The story follows Maul in his mission to destroy the leadership of the well-feared crime syndicate Black Sun.
Maul spends his time serving under Darth Sidious, killing countlessly.
His main target in the series is the leader of Black Sun, some time before Prince Xizor takes command of it.

Several sources depict Maul returning from the dead in several different forms.
The story "Resurrection" from Star Wars Tales #9 depicts a cult creating a duplicate of Maul as a replacement for Darth Vader, only for Vader to kill him.
The story Phantom Menaces in Star Wars Tales #17 (set after Return of the Jedi) depicts Luke Skywalker visiting Maul's home planet of Iridonia in an ambassadorial capacity, where he faces a "solid state hologram" of Maul projected from Maul's salvaged brain as part of a scientist's attempt to recreate Maul as Iridonia's "champion".
Luke recognizes the disruption that Maul's existence is causing in the Force, and shuts down the life-support systems keeping the brain alive.

In 2005, Dark Horse Comics published Star Wars: Visionaries, a compilation of non-canonical short comics made by the creators of Revenge of the Sith.
One story, "Old Wounds", depicts Maul with longer horns on his head, having survived his bisection at Obi-Wan's hands, with his missing bottom half replaced with cybernetic legs, similar to those of General Grievous (and his eventual revival in The Clone Wars).
He follows Obi-Wan throughout the galaxy, finally tracking him down on Tatooine a few years after the events of Revenge of the Sith.
Maul taunts Obi-Wan, saying that after he kills him, he will take a toddler-aged Luke Skywalker to his master, Emperor Palpatine.
Maul plans to kill Vader and resume his rightful place at Palpatine's side.
He ignites his new double-bladed lightsaber and engages Obi-Wan in a duel, but Obi-Wan again bests him in combat, cutting off his opponent's horns.
Maul is killed by a blaster bolt to the head from Owen Lars.
Obi-Wan thanks Owen, and says he will take Maul's body into the desert and burn it.

====
Novels ====
In early 2012, a young adult novel entitled Star Wars: The Wrath of Darth Maul was released by Scholastic.
Maul is also featured prominently in comic series starting in this period,
The Clone Wars:
The Sith Hunters and Darth Maul:
Death Sentence.
Set around the various episodes of The Clone Wars that featured Maul, the two books detail his and Savage Opress' journey across the galaxy as they seek vengeance on the Jedi.

In the 2012 novel Darth Plagueis, the titular Sith lord sends his apprentice, Darth Sidious, to the Force-rich world of Dathomir.
A Dathomiri witch, or Nightsister, senses Sidious' power in the Force and approaches him.
Assuming he is a Jedi, she begs him to take her Zabrak infant son.
She realizes that Sidious is not a Jedi, and explains how she is trying to save her son from a Nightsister named Talzin, who killed Maul's father.
It is implied that Maul has a twin brother and that Talzin is only aware of one child.
Sidious realizes the infant is strong in the Force, and would become a threat if found by the Jedi.
Concealing the existence of his own master, Sidious raises Maul to believe that he is a Sith apprentice, but he actually intends him to be an expendable minion rather than an heir.
Maul himself acknowledges his shortcomings, such as his limited understanding of politics, even as he tries to become a true Sith.

=====
Darth Maul:
Shadow Hunter =====
Darth Maul:
Shadow Hunter is a novel by Michael Reaves released on February 1, 2001.
It is a prequel novel occurring about six months before the events of The Phantom Menace.
The cover art was by David Stevenson.
Del Rey aired a TV commercial for the novel in 1999.
As portrayed in the novel, Maul was raised by Sidious for as long as he can remember.
Sidious then trains Maul as a Sith, marking his body with Sith tattoos.
Maul initially goes on several missions of terror for his master, killing politicians, crime bosses, merchants and warlords.

Sidious meets secretly with his Neimoidian contacts in the Trade Federation to finalize details in the plan to blockade Naboo.
One member of the delegation is missing; suspecting betrayal, Sidious orders Maul to hunt down the traitor.
Maul completes this task, but learns that the traitor had recorded proof of the Sith's manipulation of the Naboo blockade on a holocron to sell for profit.
A suicidal attack by a Trade Federation-hired bounty hunter interferes with Maul's plan and the holocron is purchased by a Corellian con man named Lorn Pavan.
Pavan realizes the nature of the information and seeks to take it to the Jedi Temple.
Maul, for his part, is ordered by Sidious to retrieve the holocron and kill Pavan and anyone else who might have the information.

Meanwhile, a Jedi Padawan named Darsha Assant is faced with the Jedi trials to become a full-fledged Jedi Knight, and tries to save a member of Black Sun (which Maul had crippled in Saboteur).

Pavan attempts to do business with a Hutt crime lord in one of the lower levels in Coruscant, but Maul arrives and kills the Hutt.
Pavan escapes into the caverns where they meet Darsha and her master.
The Jedi begin escorting Pavan and his droid to the temple
but Maul soon attacks them.
Darsha's master is slain while attempting to buy time for the others.
Pavan and Darsha escape various dangers of Coruscant's subterranean levels before finding themselves in another battle.

Darsha, realizing that she cannot defeat Maul, draws out their duel long enough for Pavan's droid to repair a carbonite-freezing unit and seal Pavan and the droid inside it.

Darsha plunges her lightsaber into a pile of volatile gas canisters, killing her and causing an explosion that Maul barely escapes.

Upon surveying the scene, Maul feels no trace of Pavan in the Force, not realizing that the carbonite hibernation has made his lifeforce undetectable.

An automatic timer frees Pavan from hibernation and he goes after Maul on his own.

Pavan follows Maul to a Republic space station and sneaks up on Maul, stunning him momentarily before he awakens, severes Pavan's right hand, and pursues him through the station's service tubes.

Pavan barely makes it into a public area where Maul cannot follow, and unwittingly gives the holocron to Senator Palpatine of Naboo, not realizing that Palpatine is Maul's Sith Master.
After recovering, Pavan starts to leave his quarters, only to be confronted by Maul, who kills him as a worthy opponent.

=====
Darth Maul:
Saboteur =====
Darth Maul
: Saboteur is a short story by James Luceno.
It was released in ebook form, with a length equivalent to about 55 printed pages, on February 1, 2001.

It was also published in the back of the paperback edition of Michael Reaves' Darth Maul: Shadow Hunter.

The story is about Darth Maul and takes place roughly a year before The Phantom Menace.
It recounts Maul's first solo mission and attempt to destroy two mining companies so the Trade Federation can take them over.

====
=
Maul: Lockdown =====
Maul: Lockdown is a Star Wars novel written by Joe Schreiber, released by Del Rey Books on January 28, 2014.
It was the last novel to be released in the Star Wars Legends line of the franchise.
Before the events of The Phantom Menace, Sith lords Darth Plagueis and Darth Sidious send their disciple Darth Maul to a galactic prison to recover a powerful weapon.
There, an insidious gambling empire pits the galaxy's most terrible criminals against each other in gladiatorial combat, and Maul must face Jabba the Hutt and various other horrifying obstacles to complete his mission.

==
Relationships ==


===
Mentorship tree ===


==
In popular culture ==
Since the release of The Phantom Menace, Darth Maul has proven to be a popular character.
Whilst the movie received a mixed reaction from fans and critics alike, the character was one of the most highly praised parts of the film.
IGN named Darth Maul the 16th greatest Star Wars character, noting, "Of the countless characters to walk in and out of the Star Wars saga, none looks or acts more badass than Darth Maul.
"Darth
Maul-related merchandise was popular among Hasbro Star Wars toy lines, with plastic recreations of his double bladed lightsaber and various action figures in his likeness developed.
Darth Maul was the focal point of the toy marketing campaign surrounding the 2012 re-release of The Phantom Menace, being featured on the packaging for the toy line.

===
Darth Maul fan film ===
A Darth Maul fan film titled Darth Maul:
Apprentice was released on YouTube on March 5, 2016.

===
"Darth Maul kids" viral videos ===
At least two videos of kids trying to imitate Darth Maul have gone viral:
the 2003 Star Wars Kid, which spawned an internet meme, and another which went viral in December 2017 of an 8-year-old Ontario boy pretending to be Darth Maul and displaying his martial arts skills.

== Notes ==


==
References ==


===
Further reading ===
Ward, Jason (January 28, 2014). "
MakingStarWars.net Interviews Joe Schreiber, Author of Star Wars:
Maul: Lockdown".
MakingStarWars.net.
Archived from the original on January 30, 2014.
Retrieved July 15, 2016.

"Transcript:
Del Rey's Facebook Chat With Maul:
Lockdown Author Joe Schreiber".
TheForce.
Net.
February 12, 2014.
Retrieved July 15, 2016.

==
External links ==
Darth Maul in the StarWars.com Databank
Darth Maul on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Darth Maul on IMDb
Lucasfilm Ltd. LLC is an American film and television production company that is a subsidiary of Walt Disney Studios, which is a business segment of The Walt Disney Company.
The studio is best known for creating and producing the Star Wars and Indiana Jones franchises, as well as its leadership in developing special effects, sound, and computer animation for films.
Lucasfilm was founded by filmmaker George Lucas in 1971 in San Rafael, California; most of the company's operations were moved to San Francisco in 2005.
Disney acquired Lucasfilm in October 2012 for $2.2 billion in cash and $1.855 billion in stock.

==
History ==


===
Independent era (1971–2012) ===
Lucasfilm was founded by filmmaker George Lucas in 1971, and incorporated as Lucasfilm Ltd. on September 12, 1977.
In the mid-1970s, the company's offices were located on the Universal Studios Lot.
Lucas founded The Star Wars Corporation,
Inc.  as a subsidiary to control various legal and financial aspects of Star Wars (1977), including copyright, and sequel and merchandising rights.
It also produced the 1978 Star Wars Holiday Special for 20th Century Fox Television.
That year, Lucas hired Los Angeles-based real-estate specialist Charles Weber to manage the company, telling him that he could keep the job as long as he made money.
Lucas wanted the focus of the company to be making independent films, but the company gradually became enlarged from five employees to almost 100, increasing in middle management and running up costs.
In 1980, after Weber asked Lucas for $50 million to invest in other companies and suggested that they sell Skywalker Ranch to do so, Lucas fired Weber and had to let half of the Los Angeles staff go.
By the same year, the corporate subsidiary had been discontinued and its business was absorbed into the various divisions of Lucasfilm.
Between 1981 and 1989, three Indiana Jones films, written by Lucas and directed by Steven Spielberg, were released.
While Return of the Jedi (1983) was in production, Lucas decided not to pursue further Star Wars films.
Lucasfilm produced the John Korty-directed animated film Twice Upon a Time (1983).
1985 saw the release of Paul Schrader's Mishima: A Life in Four Chapters.
The next year, Jim Henson's Labyrinth and an adaptation of Marvel Comics' Howard the Duck were released.
Ron Howard directed the fantasy film Willow in 1988; the same year the children's animated film The Land Before Time was released.
In 1992, after viewing an early computer-generated imagery test created by Industrial Light & Magic for Jurassic Park, Lucas announced his intentions to produce a Star Wars prequel trilogy.
In 1994, the long-delayed Radioland murders (co-written and produced by Lucas) was released.

In 2005, Lucasfilm opened a new studio in Singapore.
That same year, Lucasfilm Animation commenced production of a 3D animated Star Wars television series called Star Wars: The Clone Wars, with key production team members including executive producer Catherine Winder, supervising director Dave Filoni, Head of Lucasfilm
Animating Singapore Chris Kubsch, and Henry Gilroy.
Primary production took place at Lucasfilm Animation's Singapore studio.
Airing on Cartoon Network between 2008 and 2013, The Clone Wars was well received by fans and was nominated for several film awards including the Daytime Emmy Awards and the Annie Awards.
In January 2012, Lucas announced his retirement from producing large-scale blockbuster films and instead re-focusing his career on smaller, independently budgeted features.
In June 2012, it was announced that Kathleen Kennedy, a long-term collaborator with Steven Spielberg and a producer of the Indiana Jones films, had been appointed as co-chair of
Lucasfilm Ltd. It was reported that Kennedy would work alongside Lucas, who would remain chief executive and serve as co-chairman for at least one year, after which she would succeed him as the company's chairperson, which she did in June 2013.On July 8, 2012, Lucasfilm's marketing, online, and licensing units moved into the new Letterman Digital Arts Center located in the Presidio in San Francisco.
It shares the complex with Industrial Light & Magic.
Lucasfilm had planned an expansion at Skywalker Ranch in Marin County, California, but shelved the plan in 2012 due to opposition from neighbors.
However, it still plans to expand elsewhere.
Skywalker Sound remains the only Lucasfilm division based at Skywalker Ranch.
On September 5, 2012, Micheline Chau, who served as president and COO of Lucasfilm for two decades, announced that she was retiring.
With her departure, senior executives for each of the Lucasfilm divisions would report directly to Kathleen Kennedy.
Chau was credited with keeping the Lucasfilm and Star Wars brands strong, especially through animation spin-offs and licensing initiatives.
===
Subsidiary of Walt Disney (2012–present) ===


====
Acquisition process ====
Discussions relating to the possibility of The Walt Disney Company signing a distribution deal with Lucasfilm officially began in May 2011, after a meeting that George Lucas had with the then Disney CEO Bob Iger during the inauguration of the Star Tours –
The Adventures Continue attraction.
Lucas told Iger he was considering retirement and planned to sell the company, as well as the Star Wars franchise.
On October 30, 2012, Disney announced a deal to acquire Lucasfilm for $4.05 billion, with approximately half in cash and half in shares of Disney stock.
Lucasfilm had previously collaborated with the company's Walt Disney Imagineering division to create theme park attractions centered on Star Wars and Indiana Jones for various Walt Disney Parks and Resorts worldwide.
Kathleen Kennedy, co-chairman of Lucasfilm, became president of Lucasfilm, reporting to Walt Disney Studios Chairman Alan Horn.
Additionally she serves as the brand manager for Star Wars, working directly with Disney's global lines of business to build, further integrate, and maximize the value of this global franchise.
Kennedy serves as producer on new Star Wars feature films, with George Lucas originally announced as serving as creative consultant.
The company also announced the future release of new Star Wars films, starting with Episode VII:
The Force Awakens in 2015.Under the deal, Disney acquired ownership of Star Wars, Indiana Jones, and Lucasfilm's operating businesses in live-action film production, consumer products, video games, animation, visual effects, and audio post-production.
Disney also acquired Lucasfilm's portfolio of entertainment technologies.
The intent was for Lucasfilm employees to remain in their current locations.
Star Wars merchandising would begin under Disney in the fiscal year 2014.
Starting with Star Wars Rebels, certain products will be co-branded with the Disney name, akin to what Disney has done with Pixar.
On December 4, 2012, the Disney-Lucasfilm merger was approved by the Federal Trade Commission, allowing the acquisition to be finalized without dealing with antitrust problems.
On December 18, 2012, Lucasfilm Ltd. converted from a corporation to a limited liability company, changing its name to Lucasfilm Ltd. LLC in the process,.
On December 21, 2012, Disney completed the acquisition and Lucasfilm became a wholly owned subsidiary of Disney.20th Century Fox, the original distributor of the first six Star Wars films, retained the physical and theatrical distribution rights to the original two Star Wars trilogies and permanent full distribution rights for the original 1977 film, until May 2020 according to the 2012 Lucasfilm acquisition deal.
On March 20, 2019, Disney officially acquired the studio after acquiring its owner, 21st Century Fox, thus combining all these rights under its umbrella.
Lucasfilm retains the television and digital distribution rights to Star Wars Episodes I through VI with exception to Episode IV.
In December 2013, Walt Disney Studios purchased the distribution and marketing rights to future Indiana Jones films from Paramount Pictures, although the latter studio would retain the distribution rights to the first four films and would receive "financial participation" from any additional films.

====
Star Wars reboot and expansion ====
In early 2013, Iger confirmed that Lucasfilm had plans to have standalone Star Wars films released during the six-year period the Star Wars sequel trilogy was released.
The first of these released was Rogue One (2016), and the second was Solo:
A Star Wars Story (
2018).In April 2013, the video game development arm at LucasArts was closed down and most of its staff laid off.
LucasArts remained open with a skeleton staff of fewer than ten employees so it could retain its function as a video game licensor.
On May 6, 2013, Disney announced an exclusive deal with Electronic Arts (EA) to produce Star Wars games for the core gaming market for a decade.
LucasArts retained the ability to license, and Disney Interactive Studios retained the ability to develop Star Wars games for the casual gaming market.
On April 14, 2014, EA released its first Star Wars game under the Disney brand; their ten-year contract is set to expire on April 14, 2024.On January 3, 2014, Lucasfilm announced that Dark Horse Comics' license for Star Wars comics would end in 2015, and return to fellow Disney subsidiary Marvel Comics.
On April 24, 2014, Lucasfilm announced that the Star Wars Expanded Universe would be rebranded 'Legends' and no longer be canon and that only Lucas's episodic films and The Clone Wars would be considered canon in addition to new works, including the Rebels animated series, which would be overseen by a new story group.
Disney Publishing Worldwide also announced that Del Rey would publish a new line of canon Star Wars books under the Lucasfilm story group being released starting in September on a bi-monthly schedule.
On January 16, 2014, Lucasfilm opened its Sandcrawler building on Fusionopolis View in Singapore as its regional headquarters with all staff moved from Changi Business Park.
The Walt Disney Company Southeast Asia and ESPN Asia Pacific were also moved into the building.
Between December 2015 and May 2018, Lucasfilm released four Star Wars cinematic films:
Episode VII:
The Force Awakens (December 18, 2015),
Rogue One: A Star Wars Story (December 10, 2016), Episode VIII:
The Last Jedi (December 9, 2017), and Solo:
A Star Wars Story (May 10, 2018).
While The Force Awakens Rogue One, and The Last Jedi were both a critical and box office successes, Solo received mixed responses and underperformed at the box office.
In mid-September 2018, Disney CEO Bob Iger stated in an interview with The Hollywood Reporter that there would be a "slow down" in the production of Star Wars films following the under-performance of Solo at the box office.
In addition, Iger also confirmed that several Star Wars films including The Rise of Skywalker and David Benioff and D. B. Weiss' films were in development.
Benioff and Weiss subsequently exited their film production deal with Lucasfilm in October 2019 after entering into a US$200 million film production deal with Netflix.
In late September 2018, Kennedy's contract as president was renewed for three additional years and is set to retire on October 30, 2021.
In June 2019, Michelle Rejwan was named as senior vice president of live-action development and production.
On December 16, 2019, Lucasfilm released its fifth cinematic film The Rise of Skywalker, which received mixed reception from fans and critics.
In addition to the cinematic films, Lucasfilm Animation also produced several animated television shows including Star Wars Rebels (2014–2018), Star Wars Forces of Destiny (2017–2018), and Star Wars Resistance (2018–2020).
In October 2018, Lucasfilm commenced work on a live-action webseries called The Mandalorian with Jon Favreau, Dave Filoni, Kathleen Kennedy, and Colin Wilson serving as executive producers.
Premiering on the Disney+ streaming service on November 12, 2019, the series received critical acclaim and was renewed for a second season.
In late February 2020, Lucasfilm launched a multimedia publishing project called Star Wars: The High Republic, which is set 200 years before the events of The Phantom Menace and features the Jedi at the height of their power.
The High Republic involved several authors including Claudia Gray, Justina Ireland, Daniel José Older, Cavan Scott and Charles Soule.
During Disney Investor Day's conference in December 2020, Kennedy announced that Lucasfilm would be producing several new films and television shows including a Rogue Squadron movie directed by Patty Jenkins, an untitled film directed by Taika Waititi, the Ahsoka, Rangers of the New Republic, Andor, Obi-Wan Kenobi and The Acolyte live-action
Disney+ webseries,  the animated Star Wars: The Bad Batch and Star Wars: Visions Disney+ webseries.
In addition, Lucasfilm announced that it was working on a sequel to the 1988 fantasy film Willow and an adaptation of Tomi Adeyemi's young adult novel Children of Blood and Bone.
==
Company structure ==
Industrial Light & Magic – visual effects
ILMxLAB
Skywalker Sound – post-production sound design
Lucasfilm Games – video games
Lucasfilm Animation – animation
Lucasfilm Animation Singapore
Lucas Licensing – licensing and merchandising
Lucas Books – book publishing imprint of Del Rey Books, licensed from Lucasfilm.

Lucasfilm Story Group (2012–)
The first two revealed members were Pablo Hidalgo and Leland Chee, headed by Kiri Hart as Lucasfilm's SVP, Development.

===
Former divisions ===
Lucas Online –
In house web development company that built and maintained the websites of the other Lucasfilm Ltd. companies and properties.

Kerner Optical – Practical effects division (model shop) and 3-D development team (spun off from ILM in 2006 and subsequently went bankrupt in 2011)
Pixar Animation Studios – Computer animation studio that was sold to Steve Jobs in 1986.
It became a subsidiary of The Walt Disney Company in 2006, six years prior to the Disney's acquisition in December 2012.

THX – Theater sound system (spun off from Lucasfilm Ltd. in 2002)
Creative Technology owned 60% of THX, and then sold to Razer Inc. in 2016.

==
Filmography ==


===
Theatrical films ===


===
Upcoming ===


===
Television and web series ===
Animated
Live-action


==== Shows ====
Words with Warwick (2013) (as The Star Wars Corporation)
The Star Wars Show (2016–present)
Star Wars:
Galaxy of Adventures Fun Facts (2018–2020)
Our Star Wars Stories (2018–2020)
Let's Make
Star Wars (2019–present)
Let's Draw Star Wars (2019–present)
This Week!
in Star Wars (2019–present)
Star Wars: Jedi Temple Challenge (2020)


====
Documentaries and others ====
The Phantom Menace: Web Documentaries (1998–1999, documentary) (Distributor)
Star Wars: Connections (2002)
Science of Star Wars (2005, documentary)
(produced in association with Evergreen Films)
Revenge of the Sith: Web Documentaries (2005, documentary)
You Can Draw 'Star Wars' (2007, documentary) (produced in association with Dorling Kindersley Vision)
The Adventures of Young Indiana Jones Documentaries (2007–2008, documentary)
Spike TV segments:
The Force Unleashed (2008)
Manifest Destiny (2012, documentary)
Forceclash
(2012)
Rebels Recon (2014–2018, documentary)
Star Wars Celebration streams (2015–present)
Science and Star Wars (2017, documentary)
Disney Gallery:
Star Wars: The Mandalorian (2020, documentary)


===
Television films and specials ===
The Making of 'Star Wars' (1977, documentary) (as The Star Wars Corporation) (produced in association with 20th Century Fox Television)
Star Wars Holiday Special (1978) (as The Star Wars Corporation)
SP FX:
The Empire Strikes Back
(1980, documentary)
The Making of 'Raiders of the Lost Ark' (1981, documentary) (produced in association with 20th Century Fox Television)
Classic Creatures:
Return of the Jedi (1983, documentary) (produced in association with 20th Century Fox Television)
From 'Star Wars' to 'Jedi':
The Making of a Saga (1983, documentary) (produced in association with 20th Century Fox Television)
Caravan of Courage:
An Ewok Adventure (1984)
The Making of 'Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom' (1985, documentary)
Ewoks:
The Battle for Endor (1985)
The Making of 'Captain Eo' (1986, documentary)
The Great Heep (1986)
Defenders of Dynatron City (1992) (produced by DIC Entertainment in association with LucasArts)
The Adventures of Young Indiana Jones: Hollywood Follies (1994)
The Adventures of Young Indiana Jones: Treasure of the Peacock's Eye (1995)
The Adventures of Young Indiana Jones: Attack of the Hawkmen (1995)
The Adventures of Young Indiana Jones:
Travels with Fathers (1996)
R2-D2: Beneath the Dome (2001)
Star Wars at 30 (2007) (Distributor)
Star Wars:
The Legacy Revealed (2007, documentary)
Star Wars Tech (2007, documentary) (Distributor)
Robot Chicken:
Star Wars (2007)
Indiana Jones and the Ultimate Quest (2008, documentary) (Distributor)
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars Preview Special (2008, documentary)
Robot Chicken:
Star Wars Episode II
(2008)
The Star Wars Comic Con 09 Spectacular (2009)
The Making of Star Wars:
In Concert (2009)
Robot Chicken:
Star Wars Episode III (2010)
Double Victory:
The Tuskegee Airmen at War (2012, documentary)
Transmission CVI:
August 23, 2012  (2012)
Star Wars:
The Force Awakens World Premiere Red Carpet (2015, documentary)
Daisy Ridley Exclusive Q&A (2016, documentary)
Rogue One: A Star Wars Story – World Premiere (2016, documentary)
Live from the Red Carpet of Star Wars:
The Last Jedi (2017, doocumentary)
Live from the Red Carpet of Solo:
A Star Wars Story!
(
2018, documentary)
Come Behind the Scenes of 'Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker' (2019, documentary)
The Skywalker Legacy (2020, documentary)
The LEGO Star Wars Holiday Special (2020)
Star Wars: A Droid Story (TBA)


===
Attractions ===
Captain EO (1986)
Star Tours (1987)
ExtraTERRORestrial Alien Encounter (1994)
Indiana Jones Adventure (1995)
Star Tours:
The Adventures Continue (2011)
Star Wars: Path of the Jedi (2015)


===
Other productions ===
Filmmaker (1968, documentary short)
(directed by George Lucas) (nominally credit)
Return of the Ewok (1982, short)
The Adventures of Andre & Wally B. (1984, animation short)
Captain EO Promo & Pre-show (1986, short)
Wow!
(1990, short)
Rush Rush (1991, music video by Paula Abdul)
Star Wars: Starfighter, the Making of the Game (2001, documentary short)
The Beginning:
Making 'Episode I' (2001, documentary for The Phantome Menace DVD edition)
Films Are Not Released, They Escape (2002, documentary for Attack of the Clones DVD edition)
From Puppets to Pixels:
Digital Characters in 'Episode II' (2002,
documentary for Attack of the Clones DVD edition)
State of the Art:
The Pre-Visualization of 'Episode II' (2002, documentary for Attack of the Clones DVD edition)
Empire of Dreams: The Story of the 'Star Wars' Trilogy (2004, documentary for Original Trilogy DVD edition) (produced in association with 20th Century Fox Television)
The Birth of the Lightsaber  (2004, documentary short for Original Trilogy DVD edition)
The Characters of 'Star Wars' (2004, documentary short for Original Trilogy DVD edition)
The Force Is with Them: The Legacy of 'Star Wars'  (2004, documentary short for Original Trilogy DVD edition)
Making the Game: '
Star Wars:
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith' (2004, documentary short for Original Trilogy DVD edition)
The Story of Star Wars (2004, documentary for Original Trilogy DVD edition)
Star Wars Episode III:
Becoming Obi-Wan (2005, documentary for Revenge of the Sith DVD edition)
Clone Wars:
Bridging the Saga (2005, documentary for Clone Wars:
Tom I DVD edition)
Star Wars Episode III: Seduction Spot (2005, short)
Star Wars: A Musical Journey (2005, musical anthology for Revenge of the Sith DVD edition)
Within a Minute: The Making of 'Episode III' (2005, documentary for Revenge of the Sith DVD edition)
The Chosen One (2005, documentary short for  Revenge of the Sith DVD edition)
It's All for Real:
The Stunts of Episode III (2005,
documentary short for  Revenge of the Sith DVD edition)
Star Wars Heroes & Villains (2005, documentary for Revenge of the Sith DVD edition)
Clone Wars: Connecting the Dots (2005,  documentary for Clone Wars: Tom II DVD edition)
The Fan Film (2007, short) (Distributor)
Star Wars: Star Warriors (2007, documentary) (Distributor)
A New Chapter:
The Story of 'The Force Unleashed' (2008, documentary)
Unleashing the Tech:
The Power Behind the Force (2008, documentary short)
A Force Wrecking Ball, Part 2:
The Characters of 'The Force Unleashed'
(2008, documentary short)
The TFU Experience: Unleashing the Force on Your Favorite Console (2008, documentary short)
Unleashing the Force, Part 1:
The New Beginning (2008, documentary short) (Also distributor)
Warrior Make-up (2008
, documentary short for The Kingdom of the Crystal Skull DVD edition)
Lego Star Wars:
The Padawan Menace (2011, short)
Star Wars:
The Complete Saga (2011, Blu-ray edition)
Star Wars:
Deleted Scenes (in first six episodes) (2011, Blu-Ray bonus)
Lego Star Wars:
The Empire Strikes Out (2012, short)
On Set with 'Raiders of the Lost Ark' (2012, documentary for Indiana Jones films Blu-Ray edition)
Kathleen Kennedy 2013 Pioneer of the Year Award Tribute Reel (2013, documentary short)
Clash at the Cantina (2014, short)
Star Wars:
Episode VII – Toys (2015, short)
Star Wars: Path of the Jedi (2015, short)
Star Wars: Launch Bay –
Meet the Makers (2015,
documentary short)
RiffTrax:
Star Wars:
The Force Awakens (2016)
Rogue One: Recon – A Star Wars 360 Experience (
2016, short)
The Director and the Jedi (2018, documentary)
RiffTrax:
Star Wars: The Last Jedi (2018)
Reflections (2018, short)
Star Wars: Squadrons – Hunted (2020, short)
==
Franchises ==


== Notes ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official website 
Lucasfilm Ltd. at IMDb
Lucasfilm on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
The Resistance is a fictional partisan resistance movement and private paramilitary force led by General Leia Organa that opposes the First Order in the fictional universe of Star Wars.
It is a splinter of the military of the New Republic and takes inspiration from the Rebel Alliance, which had established the democratic New Republic after its war with the Galactic Empire.
Many of the senior officers of the Resistance also served in the Rebel Alliance thirty years prior, including General Organa and Admiral Ackbar, while some junior officers had parents who served in the Rebel Alliance, as is the case with Poe Dameron.

The Resistance was a precautionary movement founded by Senator Leia Organa in response to the rise of the First Order, a military dictatorship that rose from the fallen Old Empire in the galaxy's unexplored space, the Unknown Regions, by staunch, loyal former Imperial hardliners.
The New Republic did not deem the First Order to be a credible threat, so Senator Organa and several other Rebel veterans, who believed the First Order to be a threat to peace, broke away from the New Republic's military and founded the Resistance to check the First Order.
As depicted in the events of Star Wars: The Force Awakens (2015), the First Order used the Starkiller superweapon to shatter the New Republic government and starfleet, leaving the galaxy vulnerable for conquest, only to be opposed by the Resistance, whose fears had come true.

The Resistance is the main protagonist faction in the Star Wars sequel trilogy, first introduced in the 2015 film Star Wars: The Force Awakens.
It made subsequent appearances in Star Wars:
The Last Jedi (2017), Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker (2019), and related media.

== Depiction ==


===
Origins ===
One year after the Battle of Endor (depicted in Return of the Jedi), following Imperial defeat at the Battle of Jakku, many Imperial loyalists fled to the galaxy's Unknown Regions, which were nigh-impossible to safely navigate, though was made possible for these select Imperial loyalists through a secret contingency plan designed to destroy the Galactic Empire and rebuild it to eventually return to the galaxy.
The Rebel Alliance had established the New Republic, following in the footsteps of the Old Republic, and signed the Galactic Concordance with what remained of the Empire, reducing it to a mere rump state of what it once was and eventually dissolving it entirely, leaving the Republic as the sole galactic power and government.
Eventually, the First Order, a remnant of Palpatine regime, rose to power in the Unknown Regions and repeatedly ignored and violated the Galactic Concordance, rebuilding former Imperial fleets and mobilizing a new generation of stormtrooper forces in its expanding armies.
Despite this, the heavily demilitarized New Republic did not view the First Order as a true threat and disregarded it entirely, leading to several Rebel veterans led by General Leia Organa to break away and form the Resistance as a check on the designs of the First Order.
The Resistance, which hearkened back to the Rebel Alliance, recruited from both the New Republic military and worlds that experienced the worst of the Empire.
Though the Republic tolerated the Resistance, it did not officially support the private military force, though secretly some within the Republic Senate, who shared the fears of the Resistance, funded and armed the group.

===
Star Wars:
The Force Awakens (2015) ===
As depicted in the 2015 film, Star Wars:
The Force Awakens, the Resistance is in a desperate race with the First Order in finding the location of Luke Skywalker, the last Jedi.
General Leia Organa hopes to recruit her brother back into the fight while Kylo Ren of the First Order seeks to eliminate him, though Supreme Leader Snoke, leader of the First Order and Kylo Ren's master, only seeks to prevent the Resistance from reaching him first.
This culminates in General Organa dispatching agent Poe Dameron to Jakku to recover part of a navigational star map to the first Jedi temple from an old ally, Lor San Tekka, where Skywalker is believed to be residing, though Ren intercepts Dameron and captures him, killing San Tekka in the process.
Dameron's droid, BB-8, is able to escape with the map.
Dameron is tortured for information, but is able to escape with the aid of defector stormtrooper FN-2187, whom Dameron dubs Finn.
They crash land back on Jakku, where Dameron is presumed dead, though Finn finds the droid BB-8 in the company of local scavenger Rey.
When the two are seen together, they are marked by First Order stormtroopers and forced to escape Jakku together aboard the Millennium Falcon, which is docked in a local establishment.

The Millennium Falcon is found and captured by Han Solo and Chewbacca, who are forced to escape with Rey, Finn, and BB-8 after they are pursued by two rival criminal gangs, though one of them identifies the droid BB-8 and informs the First Order of it now being in the hands of Solo.
Solo, Chewbacca, Rey, Finn, and BB-8 find refuge on Takodana with Solo's old friend Maz Kanata, who runs a refugee castle on the planet and has some knowledge of the Force herself, though is not a Jedi.
There, Kanata implores Solo to return to his wife, the two having split after a tragic incident (their son, Ben Solo's fall to the dark side and transformation into Kylo Ren), helps Finn, who reveals to Rey that he was a stormtrooper, find passage to the Outer Rim to disappear, and advises Rey, who is strong in the Force, to take Skywalker's lightsaber, which Kanata has been holding onto.
Rey refuses, however, and runs into the forest.
While Finn loads onto a transport and Rey runs away, General Hux uses the Starkiller superweapon to destroy the New Republic capital, where the Republic Senate and Starfleet are also destroyed, shattering the Republic government and confirming the Resistance's worst fears, leaving the galaxy vulnerable to First Order conquest.
Kylo Ren attacks Takodana and takes Rey captive after learning she has seen the map, withdrawing the stormtrooper forces when the surviving Poe Dameron comes to aid with Resistance starfighter pilots.
Solo reunites with his wife, and travels to D'Qar with her, Finn, and BB-8, where Finn reunites with Poe Dameron.

In order to launch a counterattack on the First Order, Finn is used for his knowledge of Starkiller Base and taken to the icy planet by Solo and Chewbacca while Poe Dameron leads two starfighter squadrons, awaiting to attack the star system-destroying superweapon as Solo, Finn, and Chewbacca take down the planet's shields, though Finn also seeks to rescue Rey from the clutches of Kylo Ren.
They run into Rey, who has already escaped on her own, and capture Captain Phasma, whom they force to lower the shields.
The Resistance party then travels to the base's thermal oscillator to plant bombs and destroy it, leaving the weapon itself vulnerable, though in the process, Han Solo reunites with his son.
Rey, Finn, and Chewbacca watch on as Han Solo implores Ben to return to his family and abandon the dark side, but Kylo Ren kills his father per the urging of Supreme Leader Snoke, hoping it will give him power.
Instead, Kylo Ren finds himself only further lost in conflict and is struck by a bolt from Chewbacca.
Nevertheless, it buys time for Poe Dameron and his squadrons to attack the base and perform bombing runs on the oscillator.
After Chewbacca detonates the bombs, the oscillator is left vulnerable and Dameron performs a trench run, bombing it and destroying it, leading to the entire planet to begin collapsing in itself.
Rey and Finn duel Kylo Ren; Finn is beaten and knocked unconscious, but Rey is able to overcome Ren.
Rey escapes with Finn's body aboard the Millennium Falcon piloted by Chewbacca, and they return with Dameron and the surviving Resistance pilots back to their base on D'Qar.
While Finn and Chewbacca are healed of their injuries, the droid R2-D2 wakes up, revealing the rest of the map to the first Jedi temple and combining it with BB-8's.
Rey is sent there by General Organa, where she finds Luke Skywalker and offers him his father's lightsaber as a symbol of hope for the Resistance and the galaxy.

===
Star Wars: The Last Jedi (2017) ===
In the 2017 film Star Wars: The Last Jedi, following their successful destruction of Starkiller Base, the Resistance is ruthlessly pursued and nearly decimated by the First Order.

Having failed to destroy the Resistance base on D'Qar, the First Order dispatches the Mandator IV-class Siege Dreadnought Fulminatrix to destroy it with powerful orbital weaponry.

As the Resistance evacuate aboard the flagship Raddus and a fleet of other ships, Poe Dameron, who was recently promoted to be a commander, decides to lead a desperate assault on the Fulminatrix, hoping to destroy it to ensure that more Resistance personnel escape the planet alive.

His starfighter forces succeed in doing so, but many pilots are killed in the process.

Upon returning to the Raddus, he is demoted to captain by General Organa for losing a major portion of the Resistance's starfighters.

The Resistance's fleet is then pursued across the galaxy by the First Order's fleet of Star Destroyers, led by the massive Mega-class Star Dreadnought Supremacy, with Supreme Leader Snoke on board.

The First Order is able to keep up with the Resistance due to the Supremacy's ability to track down hyperspace jumps, and dispatches its starfighters, led by Kylo Ren, to degrade the Resistance's fighting abilities.

The Resistance's remaining starfighters are destroyed, several Resistance leaders, including Admiral Ackbar, are killed in the assault, and Organa is seriously wounded, which results in Vice Admiral Amilyn Holdo assuming temporary leadership of the Resistance.

With very little fuel and combat resources available, Holdo deduces that the only option for the Resistance is to evacuate to another planet via escape pods, a course of action that Dameron objects to, but is unable to prevent.

The First Order then begins firing upon the fleeing convoy, destroying some of the escape pods and much of the dwindling Resistance fleet as its personnel, except Holdo, begin abandoning ship, but is unable to destroy the Raddus due to its rear shield deflector.

Meanwhile, Finn, BB-8 and Resistance technician Rose Tico embark on a secret mission to the planet Cantonica to find a slicer who can disable the Supremacy's hyperspace tracker, which turns out to be a man named DJ.

The four of them then sneak on board the Supremacy in disguise and nearly succeed in shutting down the tracker, only to have DJ betray the three others and turn them over to the First Order, before escaping with a monetary reward.
Finn and Rose are then taken to a hangar where they await execution, but before they could be struck down, Holdo turns the Raddus around and stages a suicide attack by aiming a hyperspace jump right through the Supremacy, tearing it asunder.

Finn, Rose and BB-8 then fight their way out of the damaged Supremacy as it falls apart, defeating Captain Phasma in the process, and join the other surviving Resistance personnel as they gather on the planet Crait, taking refuge in an abandoned Rebel Alliance base.

The First Order, led by Kylo Ren, arrives on Crait and assaults the base, using a superlaser siege cannon, AT-M6 and AT-AT walkers to break down its heavy-duty doors.
The Resistance forces were preparing for defense, using several laser turrets and ski speeders to attack on the First Order walkers, including the Millennium Falcon counterattack on the First Order's TIE fighters and Finn's attempted suicide attack on the First Order's siege cannon, the First Order successfully breaches the base's entrance.
However, before the First Order could advance further to finish off what little remained of the Resistance, they are stopped by a Force projection of Luke Skywalker, who then confronts Kylo Ren, stalling him and his forces long enough for the remnants of the Resistance to escape the base through a backdoor exit and on board the Millennium Falcon, with additional help from Rey and Chewbacca, before blasting into hyperspace away from the First Order to regroup.
===
Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker (2019) ===
The Resistance appears in The Rise of Skywalker, set a year after The Last Jedi.
They are based on the jungle moon of Ajan Kloss.
Finn, Poe, R2-D2 and Chewie were first seen to be collecting Intel about Palpatine's return from the First Order's spy and fled back to their base using the Falcon after wiping off the TIE fighters that chased them.
Later on, they and C-3PO accompanied Rey to search for clues to the Sith wayfinder artifact mentioned by Luke Skywalker.
The Resistance under command by Poe Dameron and Finn, traveled to Exegol with their fleet to face the Sith Eternal forces and ultimately emerged victorious.
After the death of Palpatine, the Resistance has won, as the Galaxy rises up against the First Order, thus bringing the regime to its demise.
==
Leadership ==


===
Fleet Command ===
Led by Fleet Admiral Gial Ackbar, General Leia Organa, and Vice Admiral Amilyn Holdo, the Resistance Fleet is vital to the survival of the resistance in Star Wars:
The Last Jedi.
When Admiral Ackbar is killed and Leia in a coma, Vice Admiral Holdo assumes command of the fleet.

===
Ground Forces ===
The Resistance Ground forces are led by General Caluan Ematt and Commander Larma D'Acy.
Because the Resistance is too small to support official infantry units, pilots, technicians, and other personnel are trained to fight if necessary.

==
References ==


==
Further reading ==
Hidalgo, Pablo.
Star Wars:
The Force Awakens:
The Visual Dictionary (2015).

Rucka, Greg.
Before the Awakening (2015).

Gray, Claudia.
Bloodline (2016).

==
External links ==
Resistance on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
The Resistance in the StarWars.com Databank
The First Order is a fictional autocratic military dictatorship  in the Star Wars franchise, introduced in the 2015 film Star Wars: The Force Awakens.
Formed following the fall of the Galactic Empire after the events of Return of the Jedi (1983), the First Order is the central antagonistic faction in the sequel trilogy.
Aside from the films, the First Order appears in various related Star Wars media.

In The Force Awakens, the First Order is commanded by Supreme Leader Snoke and seeks to destroy the New Republic, the Resistance, and Luke Skywalker.
Snoke's apprentice, Kylo Ren, is the master of the Knights of Ren, a mysterious group of elite warriors who work with the First Order.
In the 2017 sequel The Last Jedi, Ren kills Snoke and becomes the new Supreme Leader.
In the 2019 film The Rise of Skywalker, the First Order allies with the Final Order, an armada of Star Destroyers built by Palpatine, who is revealed to have been secretly controlling the First Order via his puppet ruler, Snoke, prior to the latter being usurped by Ren.
== Depiction ==


===
Origins ===
According to Star Wars: The Force Awakens:
The Visual Dictionary (2015) and the novel Star Wars:
Aftermath trilogy by Chuck Wendig, after the Galactic Empire was defeated in Return of the Jedi at the climactic Battle of Endor in 4 ABY, thousands of worlds rose up to join the Rebel Alliance and destroy the disorganized Empire, which fell victim to warlordism.
The Alliance formally reorganized itself as the New Republic, and retook the Core Worlds, including the galactic capital Coruscant.
One year after Endor, the remaining Imperial Fleet made a final, massive attempt at a counter-offensive which came to a climax at the planet Jakku, the biggest battle in the war since Endor.
The Imperial counter-offensive was decisively defeated.
The remaining Imperial forces were pushed back to a handful of sectors on the fringe of the Outer Rim, containing only a small fraction of the galaxy's population and industrial base.
These sectors were a heavily fortified final redoubt, and the New Republic deemed that they posed too small a threat to justify the high cost in life that liberating them would require.
The New Republic forced the Empire to settle for the Galactic Concordance, a humiliating armistice agreement which imposed strict disarmament plans and punishing reparations on the remaining Imperials.
The Aftermath trilogy establishes Imperial Admiral Rae Sloane, introduced as a captain in John Jackson Miller's 2014 novel A New Dawn, as well as Commandant Brendol Hux as the de facto founders of the First Order, with Sloane, after achieving the rank of Grand Admiral, coining the term "First Order" as she establishes the reborn empire that will eventually take that name.
She is additionally inferred as a future mentor figure for General Hux, who appears as a child in Empire's End.
Over time, elements of the Imperial Remnant reorganized themselves, becoming a firmly entrenched and isolationist hermit kingdom, which spent the next three decades instigating a "cold war" against the New Republic, gradually rebuilding its military strength and secretly re-arming in violation of its armistice agreements.
The vestigial Empire secretly expanded from its original few sectors (in the galactic north), aggressively pushing into the Unknown Regions (the unexplored swaths of territory in the galactic west) to seize new undeveloped worlds in order to supplement their resource base, as well as build new shipyards and industrial infrastructure far from the eyes of the New Republic.

The 2016 novel Star Wars:
Bloodline explained how this faction officially reorganized into the "First Order", and that this final transition only occurred about six years before The Force Awakens.
By that time, the New Republic Senate had become divided into two parties: the Populists led by Leia Organa, who wanted to decentralize authority, and the Centrists, who wanted power to remain concentrated in a strong central government.
Many of the Centrists were former Imperials who admired the old Empire for bringing order to the galaxy, and who feared that without strong central control the New Republic would become as weak and ineffectual as the Old Republic.
Ultimately, many Centrist worlds seceded from the New Republic to reunite with the holdout Imperial remnants on the fringe of the galaxy, and formally combined into a new government called "the First Order".
First Order conspirators publicly revealed that Leia was in fact the daughter of Darth Vader, severely harming her political standing among the remaining Populists.
The vast majority of the New Republic's worlds remained intact, but with the exodus of the Centrists its Senate became dominated by the remaining Populists, who favored decentralization and demilitarization, not confrontation.
Even after these events, most in the remaining Senate were happy to see the Centrists go, feeling that the new First Order still controlled far too few sectors of the galaxy to ever pose a serious threat to galactic peace.
In their view, it was easier to just let the Centrist worlds peacefully leave of their own volition and rejoin the Imperial worlds rather than fight a war to keep them by force.

The new "First Order" came to be ruled by the mysterious Force-wielder known as Supreme Leader Snoke, who was secretly created by the resurrected Emperor Palpatine to control the First Order after purging its previous leadership.
Through Snoke, Palpatine seduced Leia's own son Ben Solo to the dark side of the Force, who renamed himself "Kylo Ren".
On his turn to the dark side, Ben/Kylo slaughtered most of his uncle Luke Skywalker's other Jedi apprentices (with the rest joining him) and destroyed his new academy.
Blaming himself, Luke fled into self-imposed exile to search for the ancient first Jedi Temple.
Kylo Ren, meanwhile, took on a position as Snoke's right hand within the First Order's military.

With her political standing severely weakened, and the New Republic Senate gridlocked and unwilling to recognize the First Order's military buildup, Leia Organa decides to withdraw and form her own small private army, known as the Resistance, to fight the First Order within its own borders.
She is joined by other members of the former Rebel Alliance such as Admiral Ackbar.
Publicly the New Republic continues to disavow direct association with the Resistance to maintain plausible deniability, and though the majority of the Senate does not want to intervene against the First Order, several Senators privately channel funds and resources to the Resistance.
This state of affairs continued on for the next six years until the events of The Force Awakens.
Comic book writer Charles Soule, creator of the 2015 Marvel Comics series Star Wars: Poe Dameron, explained that immediately prior to the events of The Force Awakens, "The New Republic and the First Order are in a position of detente, and while there have been a few small skirmishes between the Resistance and the First Order, it's very much a sort of cold war."
===
Military ===
The First Order's handful of sectors simply do not possess the galaxy-wide resources the old Empire used to be able to draw upon, and in addition the armistice treaties with the New Republic put strict limitations on how many ships it could physically build.
Therefore, unlike the old Galactic Empire's swarm tactics, the First Order's military has had to adapt to a more "quality over quantity" philosophy, making efficient use of what few resources it has.
Culturally, the Galactic Empires' Sith-influenced philosophies have been incorporated and streamlined.
Its military is built upon "survival of the fittest"; if one soldier cannot fulfill their duty and dies serving the First Order, then so be it.
The Order can only become stronger by culling the weak from their ranks.
A major plot point in The Last Jedi is that the First Order has developed new "hyperspace tracking" technology, allowing them to continue to chase enemy vessels through hyperspace from one jump to the next (until one or the other runs out of fuel).
This technology was first mentioned in passing in Rogue One as another research project the Empire was starting to develop almost forty years before.
However, it appears that such technology existed at the time of A New Hope, as Darth Vader was able to track the Tantive IV from Scarif to Tatooine even through hyperspace.

====
Starfleet ====
Star DestroyersThe First Order lacked the resources to build and crew thousands of Star Destroyers.
While its fleet is a fraction of the size of the Imperial fleet at its height, on a one-for-one basis its new ships are much more powerful.
In addition, they boast thirty years' worth of advances in military technologies compared to the old Empire.
As a result, the First Order now deploys starships such as the new Resurgent-class Star Destroyer, nearly twice as large as the old Imperial-class Star Destroyer which it replaced as the mainstay of the First Order fleet.
With a naval doctrine that accepted the renewed importance of starfighters within their overall strategy, the Resurgent-class adopted the carrier-centric designs of the Galactic Republic's Venator-class Star Destroyer.

TIE pilot corpsThe First Order's TIE fighters, designated TIE/fo, are more advanced than the old Empire's TIE/ln model, and show greater concern for unit stamina and survivability.
The First Order's Special Forces use a more heavily armed two-man TIE/sf variant.

Visually, their color scheme is reversed from the old Imperial design: the Empire's TIE fighters have black solar panels on a light grey metal body frame, while the First Order TIE fighters have white solar panels on a dark metal frame.
The Last Jedi also introduces a new starfighter element to the First Order fleet, the TIE Silencer superiority fighter.
Much as TIE Interceptors were the next generation fighter starting to phase out the original Imperial TIE fighters, TIE Silencers are a next-generation fighter given only to the most elite units.

Visually they somewhat resemble a cross between a TIE Interceptor and Darth Vader's TIE Advanced x1 prototype, being wider and more elongated, while boasting heavier weapons and shields to be able to face X-wings head-on.
Their technical designation is "TIE/vn" (because in earlier drafts, the ship was called "TIE vendetta").
Kylo Ren pilots his own personal TIE Silencer in The Last Jedi, which he uses to assault the Resistance ship Raddus.

In The Rise of Skywalker, another new TIE is introduced, the TIE Whisper.
This fighter is similar to the TIE Silencer but has a spherical hull more in line with typical TIE lines.
Kylo Ren uses the TIE Whisper as his personal craft in The Rise of Skywalker, using two ships in his pursuit of both Palpatine and Rey; both ships used are destroyed by Rey.

Troop TransportsFor space to surface delivery
, the First Order is also seen deploying several standard troop transports.

Elite units and high value command personnel such as Kylo Ren use the Upsilon-class command shuttle, a stylistic evolution of the old Imperial Lambda-class T-4a shuttle (but without the third fin on top, and now sporting large wings that retract upon themselves on landing).

DreadnoughtsThe
Last Jedi introduces several more ships of the First Order.
Mandator IV-class Siege Dreadnoughts are larger but rarer than Resurgent-class Star Destroyers, used as orbital bombardment platforms which can functionally wipe out entire planets' population centers (albeit through conventional weapons, just short of being considered superweapons).
Dwarfing even these other vessels are Supreme Leader Snoke's personal flagship and mobile capital, the Mega-class Star Dreadnought Supremacy: a wing-shaped vessel wider than it is long, the size of a small country.
The Supremacy measures 60 kilometers at its greatest width—equal to about 18 Resurgent-class Star Destroyers
lined up end to end.

====
Ground forces ====
The First Order employs a quality-over-quantity philosophy with its soldiers and personnel.
Unable to conscript quadrillions of soldiers to fill its Stormtrooper ranks, yet unwilling to invest huge resources in breeding a rapidly produced clone army, First Order Stormtroopers are kidnapped from their homeworlds and trained from birth, raised their entire lives for no other purpose.
First Order soldiers and crews have constantly trained for combat in war games and simulations, making them much more effective one-on-one than the endless waves of Stormtrooper conscripts fielded by the old Empire.
First Order Stormtroopers are regularly put through mental indoctrination and propaganda programs, to make sure that they remain fanatically loyal and never hesitate or question orders.
Soldiers are not even given individual names for themselves but merely serial numbers, such as "FN-2187".
First Order Stormtroopers are formally deployed in squads of ten, with the tenth spot reserved for a heavy weapons specialist as the needs of the mission require: usually a heavy gunner, but sometimes also flamethrower troops, or riot troops equipped with energy batons (which are incidentally capable of blocking a lightsaber).
The design of the armour of regular and heavy gunner Stormtroopers bears significant resemblances to the design used by the Galactic Empire, such as the helmet visor, nasal filters, and overall shape.
However, the filter was extended, among other practical features.
According to First Order officer Captain Phasma, not even a Wookiee could crush the said armour.
Some stormtroopers held high ranks—a significant improvement from the one-rank system of the Empire.
These were indicated by the colour of shoulder pauldrons.
In the rare instance of a stormtrooper earning the rank of Captain, they often earned a blasterproof cape.
Occasionally, they modify their outfit even further—Captain Phasma made blasterproof, chrome copies of all her equipment and greatly improved vision modes of her helmet's visor.
Captain Cardinal, the bodyguard of a First Order founding father, received almost all-red armour from his superior as a sign of trust.
Introduced in The Rise of Skywalker, a new variant of troopers were introduced in the form of jet troopers, equipped with G125 projectile launchers and jet packs.

The First Order also fields its own evolution of the old AT-series of armored transports, the AT-M6, used as a heavy siege weapon.
Dwarfing the older AT-AT, the AT-M6 has numerous design improvements including heavy serrated cable-cutters mounted on its legs—to avoid being tripped up again like AT-AT's were at the Battle of Hoth.

These cutters are positioned in such a way that the AT-M6 walks on its "knuckles" instead of the pads of its feet, which—combined with a heavy siege cannon which gives it a hunched-over appearance—gives the AT-M6 an almost gorilla-like profile compared to the more elephant-like AT-AT.
===
Depictions in film ===


====
The Force Awakens (2015) ====
In the film, the First Order is led by a mysterious figure named Snoke, who has assumed the title of Supreme Leader.
Like the Empire before them, the Order commands a vast force of stormtroopers.
The First Order uses regular and Special Forces versions of the Empire's venerable TIE fighter.
Its primary base of operations is Starkiller Base, a mobile ice planet which converted into a superweapon capable of destroying entire star systems across the galaxy by firing through hyperspace.
The base commander of Starkiller is General Hux, a ruthless young officer dedicated to the Order.
Snoke is a powerful figure in the dark side of the Force and has corrupted Ben, the son of Han Solo and Leia Organa who had been an apprentice to his uncle, the Jedi Master Luke Skywalker.
Masked and using the name Kylo Ren, he is one of Snoke's enforcers, much like his grandfather Darth Vader
had been the enforcer of Emperor Palpatine during the days of the Empire decades earlier.
Kylo is the master of the Knights of Ren, a mysterious group of elite warriors who work with the First Order.
Kylo and Hux are rivals for Snoke's approval, and the third member of the "commanding triumvirate" of the First Order is the formidable Captain Phasma, the commander of the stormtroopers.
Kylo is searching for Luke, who vanished some years earlier.
Snoke believes that as long as Luke lives, a new generation of Jedi Knights can rise again.
The First Order launches a preemptive strike on Hosnian Prime, the New Republic's current capital world (as well as Hosnian Prime's Sun and the other planets in the 'Hosnian system' (Hosnian Prime's solar system), as well as the spaceships there), by test-firing the Starkiller superweapon.
This devastating first strike takes the New Republic completely by surprise, not only killing most of its leadership in the Galactic Senate, but wiping out a substantial portion of the New Republic's core military fleets.
This paves the way for a resulting Blitzkrieg of the rest of the galaxy by the First Order, using the disproportionately powerful military it has rebuilt over the past three decades.

Kylo fails to retrieve the map fragment that would lead him to Luke, and the Resistance manages to destroy Starkiller Base moments before it is able to fire on the Resistance base on D'Qar, though Kylo and General Hux are able to escape the explosion, as well as Captain Phasma offscreen.

====
The Last Jedi (2017) ====
At the start of The Last Jedi, the First Order's fleet attacks the Resistance base on the planet D'Qar.
Poe Dameron rashly leads an assault against a Mandator IV-class Siege Dreadnought – one of only a handful of heavy orbital bombardment platforms in the First Order fleet – and manages to destroy it, but at the cost of the entire bomber wing of the Resistance.
Kylo Ren leads an assault in his TIE silencer, destroying several Resistance fighters.
First Order TIEs destroy the Resistance carrier ship, wiping out the Resistance leadership.
General Leia survives but is incapacitated.
Vice Admiral Holdo assumes control of the Resistance fleet while Leia recovers.

The First Order tracks the small Resistance fleet via a hyperspace jump using new "hyperspace tracking" technology.
Running low on fuel, the remaining Resistance fleet is pursued by the First Order.
This devolves into a siege-like battle of attrition, as one by one the smaller Resistance ships run out of fuel and are destroyed by the pursuing First Order fleet.
Finn and a Resistance mechanic, Rose, embark on a mission to disable the First Order's tracking device.

Meanwhile, Kylo Ren kills Snoke, replacing him as Supreme Leader of the First Order.
Poe Dameron stages a mutiny against Holdo, believing her inept and without a plan.
Holdo reveals, however, that she didn't trust Poe with her plan due to his reckless assault on the dreadnought.
The plan is for the Resistance to flee in cloaked shuttles to an old Rebel Alliance base on the planet Crait, while Holdo remains on the Resistance command ship.
The First Order discover the ruse, however, destroying most of the shuttlecraft.
Finn and Rose locate the tracking device but are captured by Captain Phasma.
Holdo sacrifices herself by directing the Resistance command ship to lightspeed jump directly into Snoke's flagship, destroying much of the First Order fleet in the process.
Finn manages to kill Captain Phasma and escape with Rose to Crait.

The First Order blast the door of the Rebel base with miniaturized Death Star technology.
Leia sends out transmissions to allies "in the Outer Rim" begging for aid, but they inexplicably do not appear.
Just as the First Order breaches the base, Luke Skywalker appears to challenge them.
A full barrage by their artillery has no effect on Luke, so Kylo Ren descends to duel him in person.
Ren realizes that Luke is a Force projection; while Ren is distracted, the surviving Resistance escape the planet.

====
The Rise of Skywalker (2019) ====
The Rise of Skywalker takes place a year after The Last Jedi.
The First Order is now led by Supreme Leader Kylo Ren after Snoke's death.
Allegiant General Pryde, who served Palpatine in the Empire, has now joined General Hux at the top of the military hierarchy.
Kylo Ren discovers a physically impaired Palpatine in exile on the Sith world Exegol.
Palpatine reveals he created Snoke as a puppet to control the First Order and has built a massive armada of Xyston-class Star Destroyers, the Final Order.
In a bid to form a new Sith Empire, Palpatine promises Kylo control over the fleet on the condition that he find and kill Rey, who is revealed to be Palpatine's granddaughter.
Kylo begins to scour the galaxy for Rey.
The Resistance acquires information on Palpatine's location and embarks on a quest to find Exegol.
Hux is revealed to have been a spy inside the First Order, due to his contempt for Kylo Ren; he is found out by Pryde and executed for treason.
Rey confronts Kylo Ren on Kef Bir at the wreckage of the second Death Star.
She impales Kylo after he is distracted by Leia calling out to him through the Force.
Rey heals Kylo and flees.
Afterwards, Kylo sees a vision of his father, Han Solo, through a memory.
This causes Kylo to abandon the dark side, and reclaim his identity as Ben Solo.
Palpatine tells Pryde to obliterate Kijimi as a show of force and orders him to come to Exegol, effectively making Pryde leader of the First Order.

After encouragement from the spirit of Luke Skywalker, Rey uses her T-65B X-wing to travel to Exegol and leads the Resistance there too.
Finn and Poe engage the Sith Eternal forces while Rey confronts Palpatine herself.
Lando Calrissian and Chewbacca arrive with reinforcements from across the galaxy, and they manage to defeat the remaining forces of the Sith Eternal.
With help from Ben and the spirits of past Jedi, Rey finally destroys Palpatine for good.
The galaxy rises up against the First Order, ultimately defeating it after 30 years of its existence.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
First Order on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Cloned, Recruited, and Kidnapped:
Military Evolution in the Star Wars Universe
Tor.com
March 30, 2016
The Mandalorian is an American space Western television series created by Jon Favreau for the streaming service Disney+.
It is the first live-action series in the Star Wars franchise, beginning five years after the events of Return of the Jedi (1983).
It stars Pedro Pascal as the title character, a lone bounty hunter who goes on the run after being hired to retrieve "The Child".

Star Wars creator George Lucas began development on a live-action Star Wars television series by 2009, but the project was deemed too expensive to produce.
After he sold Lucasfilm to Disney in October 2012, work on a new Star Wars series began for Disney+.
Favreau signed on in March 2018, serving as writer and showrunner.
He executive produces alongside Dave Filoni, Kathleen Kennedy, and Colin Wilson.
The series' title was announced in October 2018 with the start of filming at Manhattan Beach Studios in California.
Visual effects company Industrial Light & Magic developed the StageCraft technology for the series, using virtual sets and a 360-degree video wall to create the series' environments.
This has since been adopted by other film and television productions.

The Mandalorian premiered with the launch of Disney+
on November 12, 2019.
The eight-episode first season was met with positive reviews, was nominated for Outstanding Drama Series at the 72nd Primetime Emmy Awards, and won seven Primetime Creative Arts Emmy Awards.
A second season premiered on October 30, 2020, and a third season is in pre-production.
Three spin-off series will expand on the series' timeline:
The Book of Boba Fett, Rangers of the New Republic, and Ahsoka.

==
Premise ==
Beginning five years after the events of Return of the Jedi (1983) and the fall of the Galactic Empire, The Mandalorian follows Din Djarin, a lone Mandalorian bounty hunter in the outer reaches of the galaxy.
He is hired by remnant Imperial forces to retrieve the child Grogu, but instead goes on the run to protect the infant.
While looking to reunite Grogu with his kind, they are pursued by Moff Gideon, who wants to use Grogu's connection to the Force.

== Cast and characters ==
Pedro Pascal stars as Din Djarin, the series' title character and a lone bounty hunter.
Pascal compared the character to Clint Eastwood, with advanced combat skills and of "questionable moral character".
The character's real name is not given until "Chapter 8: Redemption", but Pascal accidentally revealed it early in November 2019.
His bounty in "Chapter 1: The Mandalorian" is "The Child"—colloquially known as "Baby Yoda" by audience members—an infant of the same species as Star Wars character Yoda.
He is created with animatronics and puppetry, augmented with visual effects.
He becomes the Mandalorian's ward, and his name is revealed to be Grogu in "Chapter 13
: The Jedi".
The first season features several recurring co-stars, including Carl Weathers as Greef Karga, leader of a bounty hunter guild; Werner Herzog as "The Client", an enigmatic man; Omid Abtahi as Dr. Pershing, a scientist working for the client; Nick Nolte as the voice of Kuiil, an Ugnaught moisture farmer who helps the Mandalorian; Taika Waititi as the voice of IG-11, a bounty hunter droid; Gina Carano as Cara Dune, a former Rebel shock trooper-turned-mercenary; Giancarlo Esposito as Moff Gideon, a former officer of the Imperial Security Bureau; and Emily Swallow as "The Armorer", a Mandalorian who forges armor and equipment from beskar steel.
Esposito, Carano, Weathers, and Abtahi return for the second season.
Several actors appear as characters from previous Star Wars media, including Timothy Olyphant as Cobb Vanth, Temuera Morrison as Boba Fett, Katee Sackhoff as Bo-Katan Kryze, Rosario Dawson as Ahsoka Tano, and Mark Hamill as Luke Skywalker.
Other recurring co-stars for the second season include Amy Sedaris as Peli Motto, reprising her role from the first season; Misty Rosas, who was the on-set performer for Kuiil in the first season, as the Frog Lady; Mercedes Varnado as Koska Reeves; and Ming-Na Wen as Fennec Shand, also reprising her role from the first season.

==
Episodes ==


===
Season 1 (2019) ===


===
Season 2 (2020) ===


==
Production ==


===
Background ===
Star Wars creator George Lucas began development on a live-action Star Wars television series known as Underworld in early 2009.
More than 50 scripts were written for the series by 2012, but they were eventually deemed too expensive to produce.
In January 2013, ABC president Paul Lee stated that his network would be discussing potential live-action Star Wars television series with Lucasfilm after the latter had been sold by Lucas to ABC's parent company The Walt Disney Company in October 2012.
In November 2017, Disney CEO Bob Iger announced that Disney and Lucasfilm were developing a live-action Star Wars television series for the new streaming service Disney+.
===
Development ===
While working on The Lion King (2019), a photo-realistic remake of the 1994 animated film, in 2017, director Jon Favreau pitched an idea he had for a Star Wars television series to Lucasfilm president Kathleen Kennedy.
Kennedy suggested Favreau discuss the idea with Dave Filoni, executive producer on the animated series Star Wars: The Clone Wars and Star Wars Rebels.
Favreau and Filoni had met at the Skywalker Ranch when Favreau was working on Iron Man (2008) and Filoni was working on the first season of The Clone Wars, and Favreau subsequently voiced the Mandalorian character Pre Vizsla in The Clone Wars for Filoni.
When Favreau met with Filoni about his series idea, the latter drew a doodle of a baby of the same species as the Star Wars character Yoda which became "The Child".
Favreau wanted to explore the "scum and villainy" of the Star Wars universe following the events of the film Return of the Jedi (1983).
He began spending several hours at the end of each day developing the series while he was directing The Lion King.
Lucasfilm announced that Favreau would write and executive produce a new Star Wars series for Disney+ in March 2018.
Kennedy added that the series was an opportunity for a diverse group of writers and directors to be hired to create Star Wars stories, after the franchise's films had been criticized for being written and directed by only white men.
In May, Favreau stated that he had written scripts for four of the series' eight episodes before being officially hired for the project.
On October 3, Favreau announced that the series was titled The Mandalorian and revealed the premise for the show.
The following day, Lucasfilm announced that Filoni, Kennedy, and Colin Wilson would executive produce the series alongside Favreau, with Karen Gilchrist acting as co-executive producer.
The series premiere was set to be available with the launch of Disney+ in November 2019.
Star Pedro Pascal described the series as taking the space Western undertones from the Star Wars films "and infusing it with steroids".
In July 2019, Favreau confirmed that there would be a second season of the series and that he had begun writing it.
Iger announced in February 2020 that the second season would premiere that October.
By late April, Favreau had been writing a third season for "a while" and further development on the season was beginning.
In September, co-star Giancarlo Esposito said the second season would "start to lay the groundwork for the depth and breadth that's going to come in season 3 and season 4, where you’re really gonna start to get answers."
Favreau announced in December 2020 that the third season was in pre-production, and would begin filming in 2021 once the spin-off series
The Book of Boba Fett completed filming.
It is expected to begin filming on April 5, 2021.

===
Casting ===
In November 2018, Pedro Pascal was confirmed to be portraying the Mandalorian after being rumored to be cast in the role for some time.
Pascal initially thought he was being cast as the Star Wars character Boba Fett due to the visual similarities between that character and the Mandalorian, but the latter is actually a separate character named Din Djarin.
Favreau called Pascal "a classic movie star" who "had the presence and skill[s]" necessary to portray a character largely concealed under a helmet.
The Mandalorian is also portrayed by stunt doubles Brendan Wayne and Lateef Crowder.
Pascal worked with Favreau and Filoni to record the character's dialogue later.
In February 2021, Lucasfilm said Gina Carano, a recurring co-star during the first two seasons, was no longer employed by the company.
This came after Carano made a social media post comparing being a Republican in the United States to the treatment of Jewish people during the Holocaust, with Lucasfilm saying the post was "abhorrent and unacceptable".
Carano had been repeatedly warned about her social media posts by Lucasfilm executives who reportedly had been looking for a reason to fire her for two months.
The February 2021 posts were "the final straw", and the decision to fire the actress was made by Lucasfilm executives rather than Favreau.
The Walt Disney Company CEO Bob Chapek said Carano was fired because her posts did not align with the values of Disney, which he said were "universal" and not political.
The Hollywood Reporter reported that Carano's role of Cara Dune was not expected to be recast, though industry insiders felt that was still a possibility due to story and merchandising reasons.

===
Filming ===
The series is filmed at Manhattan Beach Studios in California.
Filoni directed the series' first episode, making his live-action directorial debut, with Rick Famuyiwa, Deborah Chow, Bryce Dallas Howard, and Taika Waititi also directing for the first season.
Filoni, Howard, and Famuyiwa returned for the second season, and are joined by Favreau, who was unable to direct in the first season due to his commitments to The Lion King, Peyton Reed, co-star Carl Weathers, and Robert Rodriguez.

===
New technology ===
Visual effects studio Industrial Light & Magic, a subsidiary of Lucasfilm, opened a new division in November 2018 called ILM TV, specifically intended for episodic and streaming television.
Based in London with support from ILM's San Francisco, Vancouver, and Singapore locations, one of the first projects for the new division was The Mandalorian.
While directing The Jungle Book (2016), Favreau had used large screens on set to create interactive lighting so when live action footage was combined with a digital environment in post-production the effect would be more realistic.
He found the process to be effective, but time-consuming.
When he began working on The Lion King, Favreau worked with visual effects vendor Moving Picture Company, technology developer Magnopus, and the game engine software Unity to develop a new virtual camera system that allowed him to film scenes in a virtual reality environment as if he was filming with physical cameras.
For The Lion King, the results of the virtual photography were then rendered by MPC as final animation for the film.
On The Mandalorian, Favreau wanted to use the virtual technology to aid live action photography and also develop the video wall system.
ILM partnered with video game developer Epic Games to create a new system named StageCraft based on Epic's game engine Unreal Engine.
StageCraft consists of large LED video screens on which digital environments can be rendered in real time for actors to perform in front of.
During pre-production, the virtual photography process developed for The Lion King was used to plan the series' filming and determine what environments would be needed on set.
The digital environments were then created by ILM and added to StageCraft ready for live action photography with the actors.
Some of these environments were based on location photography in countries such as Iceland and Chile, on which Favreau said, "The actors aren't brought on location.
The location is brought to the actors.
"
The environments were designed by the series' visual art department, led by Lucasfilm's creative director Doug Chiang and production designer Andrew L. Jones.
During filming, the digital environments were rendered on a video wall in real time, allowing the filmmakers and actors to see the environments.
ILM used a smaller version of the technology for Solo: A Star Wars Story (2018), but on The Mandalorian they utilized a 21-foot-tall (6.4 m) set that was 75 feet (23 m) in diameter, surrounded by a 360-degree semicircular LED video wall and ceiling.
The Manhattan Beach Studios set is referred to as a "volume", which is traditionally the name for motion capture  stages.
Favreau's initial intention was to use the video wall as a way to provide realistic interactive lighting for the actors, with a section of the screen behind the actors displaying a green screen so a higher quality version of the background could be added in post-production.
During filming tests with the technology, the team realized that the Unreal Engine could render visuals fast enough that they could have the background move in relation to the camera.
This allowed the system to maintain the appearance of parallax, where the environment would appear differently based on the angle it was being looked at just as a real 3D environment would.
This effect causes some distortion to the image on the video wall, but looks like a real environment when viewed through the camera.
The images rendered on the video wall in real time were often of a high enough quality to be used as final effects when filmed on set.
Physical elements were added to the volume to match the digital backgrounds, such as dirt on the floor to match dirt displayed on the video wall.
Interior spaces were also created, such as an office used by Imperial agents where the walls and ceiling were displayed on the video wall around a physical table.
The production had several physical sections of the Razor Crest, the Mandalorian's ship, that could be placed within the volume, such as having the front half of the ship physically built and the back half rendered digitally.
The environments could be manipulated in StageCraft on set as required, allowing the filmmakers to request changes to the environment and have them rendered on the video wall on the same day.
The production was able to change between environments within half an hour, or even faster if the physical elements within the volume were not visible and did not need to be changed.
One of the primary advantages of using the video wall technology was the realistic lighting, with the wall providing ambient light and accurate reflections on the actors.
This was especially important for the Mandalorian, who wears reflective armor.
Traditionally, on a production using green screen, the visual effects team would have to remove the green reflections from a reflective character or object in post-production, and then add new reflections that matched the digital environment.
Using StageCraft, the reflections in the Mandalorian's armor were already correct on set.
It also allowed for the series' cinematographers to light scenes in a way that would match the background, rather than lighting the set and hoping the digital background would match in post-production as they would have to do with green screen.
A technique used by the production to ensure the lighting from the video wall looked natural was to have the actors in shadow, with light from the environment behind them, often creating silhouettes.

===
Music ===
Composer Ludwig Göransson was recommended by several of his previous collaborators to Favreau, including directors Ryan Coogler and Anthony and Joe Russo, and musician Donald Glover.
Favreau knew that music would be important to the series due to the impact of John Williams' score on the Star Wars films, but also wanted the music of the series to be different from the films.
He wanted the series to sound "a little grittier, a little edgier and a little more tech-oriented".
Göransson first met with Favreau in November 2018, when Favreau showed the composer concept art for the series and discussed his inspirations for the story and tone, including Western and samurai films.
They also discussed how they felt when they first heard Williams' Star Wars music, and Göransson set out to recreate those feelings and "capture the soul of what Star Wars is" but in a new way.
Göransson was announced as composer for the series in December 2018.
The basis of the main theme was created from Göransson experimenting with a bass recorder, digitally manipulating it to make it more "futuristic".
Guitars, a piano, drums, and synthesizers are also featured in the main theme.
A 70-piece orchestra was used for the first season, combined with recordings of Göransson playing the main instruments which he augmented with synthesizers and other digital manipulation.
Walt Disney Records released a soundtrack album for each episode of the first season.
Because of the COVID-19 pandemic, orchestra players were recorded remotely or in smaller, distant groups for the second season.
Two albums were released for the second season, each covering four episodes of the season.

==
Themes ==


===
Parenting and fatherhood ===
One of the primary themes of The Mandalorian is parenting and fatherhood, particularly through the father–son relationship dynamic between the Mandalorian and the Child.
Ryan Britt of Fatherly wrote that this is unusual in Star Wars stories, and that past examples of parenting in the franchise have tended to be poor ones, from the murderous Darth Vader (father of Luke Skywalker) to the neglectful Galen Erso, father of Jyn Erso in Rogue One (2016).
Britt wrote: "For years the Star Wars franchise avoided depicting a parent-child dynamic.
With Mando and Baby Yoda, that's finally changing."
The dynamic between Kuiil and IG-11 also reflect the childrearing theme in The Mandalorian.
The two have a relationship similar to that of a father and son, as demonstrated in the scene in which Kuiil teaches IG-11 how to operate and function after the droid is reprogrammed.
Vulture writer Kathryn VanArendonk argued that parenting has been the subject of past Star Wars stories, but almost always during later stages of parenthood, rather than an infant in early stages such as the Child.
As examples, she cited Obi-Wan Kenobi serving as a mentor to the adolescent Anakin Skywalker, Princess Leia lamenting over her grown son Kylo Ren, or the absence of Rey's parents.
Britt argued strong parental examples in Star Wars are important because the franchise is so often associated with the childhoods of its fans.
The Mandalorian particularly highlights the challenges of being a single parent, and a working parent, as the Mandalorian struggles to continue his day job as a bounty hunter and mercenary while serving as the sole caretaker of the Child.
Richard Newby of The Hollywood Reporter described the show as "the adventures of a single dad looking for a job".
Several reviewers have compared the dynamic between the Child and the Mandalorian to Lone Wolf and Cub, a manga about a samurai warrior and his young son.
Favreau acknowledged Lone Wolf and Cub as an influence in an episode of Disney Gallery:
The Mandalorian.
The Mandalorian's parental role in the series makes him a softer and more relatable character; he changes in a positive way because of raising the Child, becoming less selfish and self-absorbed.
He risked his life and drastically changed his career as a bounty hunter to accept his responsibility as the Child's caretaker and guardian, marking a significant parental sacrifice.
When the Mandalorian seeks work to earn money, he is now doing so to provide not only for himself, but for the Child as well.
We see several examples of the Mandalorian parenting the Child throughout the series, such as when he stops the Child from pressing random buttons in the cockpit of the Mandalorian's spaceship, ultimately by holding him in his lap.
In another example, the Mandalorian establishes a car seat for the Child in the cockpit of his ship, so he can be seated safely and comfortably during their travels.
The relationship between the Mandalorian and the Child is an example of unexpected fatherhood.
The Mandalorian feels a connection and parental bond with the Child because of his own childhood, when he was orphaned upon the death of his parents and was adopted by the Mandalorian culture as a "foundling".
Nevertheless, fatherhood is not a role the Mandalorian initially seeks, and he makes repeated initial attempts to avoid this responsibility.
He first does so in "Chapter 3:
The Sin", when he first leaves the Child with the Client.
He does so again in "Chapter 4: Sanctuary", when he plans to leave the Child with Omera, a protective mother on the planet Sorgan, who is willing to take the Child into her own family.
The Mandalorian does not fully commit to the role of fatherhood until the first-season finale, "Chapter 8: Redemption", when the Child himself is also adopted into the Mandalorian culture as a "foundling" and the Mandalorian is formally declared to be his father figure.
He nonetheless continues to search for what he feels may be a more appropriate guardian for the Child, as in the second season's fifth episode, "The Jedi", in which he seeks to leave him with Ahsoka Tano.
Several writers suggested the fact that the Mandalorian's face is concealed has a tabula rasa effect and his anonymity allows viewers to see and imagine themselves as parents.
Britt said this "allow(s) us to dream about what arsenal we might deploy to protect our children".
However, Singer said the show's setting in space make the challenges of child-rearing seem more exciting and exotic than they might otherwise be.
Anthony Breznican of Vanity Fair has noted that none of the day-to-day difficulties of parenthood are portrayed in the series: "There is no shrill squawking from Baby Yoda, no tantrum, no spit-up, no uncontrollable shrieking that burrows into a parent's psyche like a dentist's drill shredding a soft, pink nerve."
Likewise, Vulture writer Kathryn VanArendonk said the show ignores or does not address many parenting details that make fatherhood difficult, such as what the Child eats, when he goes to sleep, and whether he wears diapers.
She wrote: "The Mandalorian is uninterested in diapers, and so Mando gets to be a very particular image of fatherhood: the guy who doesn't have to sweat the small stuff."
VanAnderonk described this as a wish fulfillment fantasy for parents or prospective parents: "a vision of parenting stripped so thoroughly of all detail and specificity that all that's left are archetypes: the parent, the child".
The Child encounters a handful of other protector figures throughout the first season, including Omera, IG-11, and Peli Motto.
Some observers have criticized the series for the fact that the Mandalorian repeatedly leaves the Child alone or in the hands of relative strangers, as well as for making decisions that place the Child in danger.
One example is in "Chapter 6:
The Prisoner", when he allows a team of dangerous mercenaries to use his ship while the Child is on board, nearly resulting in the Child's death.
An interaction the Mandalorian has with Peli Motto in "Chapter 5:
The Gunslinger" is one of the most overt discussions about the challenges of caring for the Child.
When the Mandalorian accidentally wakes the child, who had been sleeping in Peli's arms, she chides him: "Do you have any idea
how long it took me to get it to sleep?
"
She also condemns the Mandalorian for leaving the child alone on the ship, saying: "you have an awful lot to learn about raising a young one".
ScreenCrush writer Matt Singer argued the Mandalorian's parenting errors makes the show that much more appealing because making mistakes is a large part of being a parent.
Eileen Chase of Today echoed this: "He is not an ideal parent, just like the rest of us who have to balance parenting and work."
===
Good and evil; nature versus nurture ===
The nature of good and evil and the question of nature versus nurture is raised repeatedly throughout The Mandalorian, perhaps most overtly through by Kuiil's reprogramming of IG-11 from a bounty hunter to a nurse droid and protector.
Even after IG-11 is reprogrammed, the Mandalorian does not believe he has truly changed, because he believes droids have an essential nature and that IG-11's nature remains murderous and untrustworthy.
But in reprogramming IG-11, Kuiil nurtures him and helps him to change; Kuiil feels that in the process of learning how to function again, IG-11 gained a new personality.
Kuiil insists to the Mandalorian: "Droids are not good or bad — they are neutral reflections of those who program them."
Keith Phipps of Vulture wrote of IG-11 and the nature versus nurture theme: "He's not bad.
He's just programmed that way, and with care and change he can do a lot of good in the world.
"The
Kuiil and IG-11 scenes also demonstrate that the way in which the "child" character is raised makes a significant difference in whether the child becomes an asset or a threat to those around him.
The droid was a dangerous assassin before Kuiil reprogrammed him, but thanks to the Ugnaught's parenting, he becomes a protector and helper instead.
Some writers have likewise suggested the Child is not inherently good or evil, but that instead, like all children, he is impressionable and does not fully understand the events occurring around him.
He is learning about the world around him and needs guidance as he develops his abilities.
It will largely fall to the Mandalorian to provide this guidance, as when the Mandalorian stops him from strangling Cara Dune.
However, multiple writers have questioned whether the violent acts the Child has repeatedly witnessed throughout The Mandalorian are having a negative impact on his development, and that he is learning to become violent himself as a result.
Phipps wrote of this: "That look of wonder in the Child's eyes as IG-11 kills and kills again is hilarious, but also a little chilling."
One particular scene in "Chapter 7:
The Reckoning" led many reviewers and fans to question whether the Child may be demonstrating evil tendencies.
During a scene on the Mandalorian's spaceship, the Child observes as the Mandalorian and Cara Dune engage in a friendly arm wrestling match.
During the contest, the Child uses the Force to choke Cara, nearly strangling her before the Mandalorian intervened.
Throughout the Star Wars franchise, that ability has been most commonly associated with the Dark Side of the Force, particularly Darth Vader.
Sarah Bea Milner of Screen Rant wrote: "The moment is genuinely shocking — and more than a little disturbing."
Some reviewers noted, however, that the Child likely mistakenly believed the Mandalorian was in danger and intervened to help.
Additionally, in the same episode, the Child uses Force healing to save Greef Karga, a power typically associated with the Light Side.
Nevertheless, some writers have suggested viewers had been underestimating the Child's capacity for evil because he is so adorable.
Fans speculated the Child could be presenting a false personality or using the Force to manipulate people into caring about him to help ensure his survival.
However, Caitlin Gallagher of Bustle suggested rather than building toward making the Child evil, the show could be suggesting the Mandalorian needs to find a way to raise the Child in a less violent environment.

==
Release ==
The Mandalorian premiered on the streaming service Disney+
on its United States launch day, November 12, 2019.
The second season premiered on October 30, 2020.

== Reception ==


===
Critical response ===
For the first season, the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported a 93% approval rating with an average rating of 7.97/10 based on 36 reviews.
The website's critical consensus reads, "Action-packed and expertly-crafted—if at times a bit too withholding—The Mandalorian is a welcome addition to the Star Wars universe that benefits greatly from the cuteness of its cargo.
"
Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned a score of 70 out of 100 for the season, based on reviews from 29 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews".
For the second season, Rotten Tomatoes reported a 94% approval rating with an average score of 8.6/10, based on 23 reviews.
The site's critical consensus reads: "
With fan favorites and fresh faces galore both in front of and behind the camera, The Mandalorian's sophomore season solidifies its place as one of Star Wars's most engaging and exciting sagas.
"
Metacritic assigned a score of 76 out of 100 based on 14 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews".
===
Accolades ===


===
Industry impact ===
The Mandalorian was the first production to be filmed using real time rendering for realistic, parallax environments.
Favreau believed that the StageCraft technology developed for the series would have a significant impact on the production of films and television series moving forward.
He attributed the breakthroughs made with the technology to the support of Kathleen Kennedy, who was in charge of both Lucasfilm and ILM, as well as to his own drive for innovation, and to previous work done by George Lucas on new technology for the Star Wars films.
Favreau also acknowledged that much of the technology involved in StageCraft is not proprietary and is readily available to others, it just had not been combined in this way before.
Favreau invited other filmmakers and studios to visit the series' set and see how the new technology was being used, noting that Lucas and other filmmakers such as James Cameron had done the same when they had been working on innovative film projects.
Favreau added that the companies working on the series' new technologies—including ILM, Epic, and MPC—were being encouraged to share their work and develop the technology further beyond the requirements of the series.
Several actors working on the series, including Carl Weathers and Giancarlo Esposito, gave high praise to the technology and the way it allowed them to act within the environment rather than pretend in front of green screen.
After learning lessons about the technology during production on the first season of The Mandalorian, ILM was able to make several advancements beginning with the second season.
This included transitioning StageCraft to a fully in-house product utilizing ILM's own game engine, Helios, rather than Epic's Unreal Engine.
In February 2020, ILM announced that it was making its StageCraft technology available to all filmmakers and production studios as a complete end-to-end solution, and that December, it was announced that three additional StageCraft volumes–in Los Angeles, London, and Australia–were being built.

==
Spin-offs ==
In November 2019, Walt Disney Studios CCO Alan Horn said if the series was successful, a film featuring the Mandalorian could be developed.
The next month, Favreau said there was an opportunity to explore the series' characters in other Star Wars films or television series.
Bob Iger said in February 2020 that spin-offs of The Mandalorian were being considered, and there was potential to add more characters to the series with the intention of then giving them their own series.
Favreau said in October that as more characters are introduced in the series, "we are beginning to explore where we could go".
He felt Lucasfilm could be "more responsive" to audience reactions in determining potential spin-offs due to the faster production time for television series than films.
Favreau looked to his experience working in the Marvel Cinematic Universe, where smaller stories exist within the larger narrative, as a potential guide for spin-offs.
Additionally, both Favreau and Pascal were open to the idea of the Mandalorian appearing in a Star Wars film, but Favreau was in "no rush" to do this.
In December 2020, the spin-off series Rangers of the New Republic, Ahsoka, and The Book of Boba Fett were announced, with all three series developed by Favreau and Filoni, set within The Mandalorian's timeline, and planned to culminate in a "climactic story event".
===
The Book of Boba Fett ===
A spin-off miniseries focused on Boba Fett was reported in November 2020.
It was officially announced as The Book of Boba Fett a month later, and was already in production by that point.
Favreau, Filoni, and Robert Rodriguez executive produce, with Morrison and Wen reprising their respective roles as Fett and Fennec Shand.
The series will debut in December 2021.

===
Rangers of the New Republic ===
A spin-off series titled Rangers of the New Republic was announced in December 2020.

===
Ahsoka ===
A limited series titled Ahsoka, featuring Dawson reprising her role as Ahsoka Tano, was revealed in December 2020 with Filoni writing and executive producing alongside Favreau.

==
Other media ==


===
Documentary series ===
A documentary series, Disney Gallery: The Mandalorian, features interviews with the cast and crew of The Mandalorian, behind-the-scenes footage, and roundtable conversations hosted by Favreau that explore the production of the series.
The first season premiered on Disney+
on May 4, 2020, Star Wars Day.
An hour-long special covering the second season was released on December 25, 2020.

===
Publishing ===
Lucasfilm announced a publishing campaign of tie-in books and comics for the series in June 2020.
The campaign was announced to included The Art of The Mandalorian (Season One) by Phil Szostak, an original adult novel written by Adam Christopher and published by Del Rey Books, a visual guide written by Pablo Hidalgo and published by DK, a junior novelization of the first season written by Joe Schreiber, and comic books inspired by the series to be published by Marvel Comics and IDW.
One months later, the novel by Adam Christopher was delayed from December 2020 to November 2021, before both it and the visual guide by Pablo Hidalgo were cancelled in March 2021.

===
Video games ===
In November 2020, Minecraft released a Star Wars-themed downloadable content, which included locations and characters from The Mandalorian.
Din Djarin and Grogu appear in Zero Point, Fortnite Battle Royale's chapter two, season five event.
Djarin's sniper rifle and jetpack were also available as playable items.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official website
The Mandalorian on Disney+
The Mandalorian at IMDb
The Mandalorian on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
The Mandalorian on StarWars.com
The Death Star is a fictional mobile space station and galactic superweapon featured in the Star Wars space-opera franchise.
The first version, which appears in the original 1977 film Star Wars, is stated to be more than 160 kilometers (99 mi) in diameter, and is crewed by an estimated 1.7 million military personnel and 400,000 droids.
The second Death Star appears in Return of the Jedi, and is significantly larger at 200 kilometres (120 mi) in diameter and while unfinished, is technologically more advanced than its predecessor.
Built by the Galactic Empire to strengthen its control over the galaxy, both Death Stars are armed with kyber crystal-powered superlasers, which can destroy entire planets.
The first Death Star requires significant time to fully recharge its superlaser, and is easily destroyed by the Rebel Alliance taking advantage of its one weakness: an exhaust port which, when hit with a precise shot, triggers a chain reaction through the station's entire infrastructure.
The second Death Star is destroyed by a direct attack on its main reactor, as its incomplete state allows ships to fly through its infrastructure.

Since its first appearance, the Death Star has become a cultural icon and a widely recognized element of the Star Wars franchise.
It inspired numerous similar superweapons in fiction, as well as in other Star Wars works.
The Force Awakens introduced Starkiller Base, a planet converted by the First Order into a superweapon.
While equipped with a superlaser that can fire multiple beams at a time to destroy entire planetary systems, it is destroyed as easily as the second Death Star, through an attack on its thermal oscillator.

==
Origin and design ==
According to franchise creator George Lucas, his initial outline for the Star Wars saga did not feature the Death Star in the portion that would be adapted as the first film.
When he set to creating the first act of this outline as a feature, he borrowed the Death Star concept from the third act.
Although details, such as the superlaser's location, shifted between different concept models during the production of Star Wars (1977), the notion of the Death Star being a large, spherical space station over 100 kilometers in diameter was consistent in all of them.
George Lucas gave the original task of designing a "Death Star" to concept artist and spaceship modeler Colin Cantwell, who had collaborated with Stanley Kubrick on the 1968 film 2001: A Space Odyssey.
In a 2016 interview, Cantwell related that "I didn't originally plan for the Death Star to have a trench, but when I was working with the mold, I noticed the two halves had shrunk at the point where they met across the middle."
As it "would have taken a week of work just to fill and sand and refill this depression," Cantwell suggested a trench to Lucas to save the labor.
Lucas liked the idea, and the Death Star model was created by John Stears.
The buzzing sound counting down to the Death Star firing its superlaser comes from the Flash Gordon serials.
Portraying an incomplete yet powerful space station posed a problem for Industrial Light & Magic's modelmakers for Return of the Jedi.
Only the front side of the 137-centimeter model was completed, and the image was flipped horizontally for the final film.
Both Death Stars were depicted by a combination of complete and sectional models and matte paintings.

===
Special effects ===
The Death Star explosions featured in the Special Edition of A New Hope and in Return of the Jedi are rendered with a Praxis effect, wherein a flat ring of matter erupts from the explosion.

The grid plan animations shown during the Rebel briefing for the attack on the Death Star late in A New Hope were an actual computer-graphics simulation from the Jet Propulsion Laboratory made by Larry Cuba and Gary Imhoff as part of a CalArts project, and had been included during filming.
After filming was complete, the original model, as well as one of the surface setpieces, were to be thrown out; however, they were salvaged.

== Depiction ==
The original Death Star was introduced in the original Star Wars film, which later had elements of its backstory explored in Attack of the Clones, Revenge of the Sith, The Clone Wars, Rebels, and Rogue One.
The second Death Star appears in Return of the Jedi and The Rise of Skywalker, and a similar superweapon, the Starkiller Base, appears in The Force Awakens.
Both the original and second Death Star were moon-sized and designed for massive power-projection capabilities, capable of destroying an entire planet with a 6.2x1032 J/s power output blast from their superlasers.

===
Original Death Star ===
The original Death Star's completed form appears in the original Star Wars film, known as the DS-1 Orbital Battle Station, or Project Stardust in Rogue One; before learning the true name of the weapon, the Rebel Alliance referred to it as the "Planet Killer".
Commanded by Governor Tarkin, it is the Galactic Empire's "ultimate weapon", a huge spherical battle station 120 kilometers in diameter capable of destroying a planet with one shot of its superlaser.
The film opens with Princess Leia transporting the station's schematics to the Rebel Alliance to aid them in destroying the Death Star.
To mark the Death Star being fully operational, Tarkin orders the Death Star to destroy Leia's home world of Alderaan in an attempt to press her into giving him the location of the secret Rebel headquarters; she gives them the location of Dantooine which housed a now-deserted Rebel base, but Tarkin has Alderaan destroyed anyway as a demonstration of the Empire's resolve.
Later, Luke Skywalker, Han Solo, Chewbacca, Obi-Wan Kenobi, C-3PO, and R2-D2 are pulled aboard the station by a tractor beam, where they discover and manage to rescue Princess Leia.
As they make their escape, Obi-Wan sacrifices himself whilst duelling Darth Vader, enabling the others to flee the station.
Later, Luke returns as part of a fighter force to attack its only weak point: a ray-shielded particle exhaust vent leading straight from the surface directly into its reactor core.
Luke is able to successfully launch his X-wing fighter's torpedoes into the vent, impacting the core and triggering a catastrophic explosion, which destroys the station before it can use its superlaser weapon to annihilate the Rebel base on Yavin 4.The first Death Star's schematics are visible in the scenes on Geonosis in Star Wars:
Episode II – Attack of the Clones showcasing the early development of the Death Star prototype.
The Death Star plans were designed by Geonosians led by Archduke Poggle the Lesser, a member of the Confederacy of Independent Systems, and is shown early in construction at the end of Star Wars: Episode III – Revenge of the Sith.
The Death Star plans are a central plot-point in the 2016 film Rogue One and the original 1977 film Star Wars.

The Death Star began as a Geonosian design, but became operational after nearly two decades of work by a team of brilliant scientists sequestered on the rainswept world of Eadu.
Led by a reluctant Galen Erso, the Death Star scientists seek to fuse kyber crystal shards into larger structures and use those crystals to amplify energy into a stable beam powerful enough to destroy an entire planet.
The Clone Wars Legacy story reel from the unfinished Crystal Crisis on Utapau episodes revealed that General Grievous went to Utapau prior to Revenge of the Sith in order to acquire an enormous kyber crystal, which was required to power the Death Star's super laser.
A hologram from the original Death Star is briefly visible in a scene at the Resistance base in The Force Awakens and used as a means of comparison with one from the First Order's own superweapon, Starkiller Base.
(
The Planet Ilum)
In the animated series Star Wars Rebels, the two-part episode "Ghost of Geonosis" hinted that the Geonosians were nearly wiped out to extinction out of the Empire's need for secrecy.
Saw Gerrera, having been sent to Geonosis to investigate, deduced the Empire possesses a superweapon and resolved to discover the Death Star as depicted in the final season two-parter "
In the Name of the Rebellion."
Though it was a dead-end, finding only scientists being abducted by the Empire, Saw learned the weapon is powered by kyber crystals taken from the Jedha system.

The anthology film Rogue One focuses on a band of Rebels stealing the plans for the first Death Star prior to the events of A New Hope.
The Death Star project was overseen by Orson Krennic, the Director of Advanced Weapons Research for the Imperial Military.
Under Krennic's supervision, the project was beset by constant delays, and he forcibly recruited weapons designer Galen Erso (the father of Jyn Erso, the movie's main protagonist) to complete the design; nevertheless, it was another fifteen years before the Death Star was operational.
The Death Star's primary laser was powered by kyber crystals mined from the desert moon of Jedha, and is first used to destroy Jedha City both as a response to a violent insurgency on the planet, and as a display of the Death Star's operational status to restore the Empire's confidence in the project.
Grand Moff Tarkin assumes control over the Death Star while Krennic investigates security breaches in the design project.
It is subsequently revealed that Galen discreetly sabotaged the design by building a vulnerability into the reactor.
This is the same vulnerability that Luke Skywalker takes advantage of during the events of A New Hope.
After the Death Star plans are stolen from the Scarif vault, Tarkin fires the Death Star's superlaser on the base killing Krennic, as well as Jyn Erso and Cassian Andor.
Rogue One also reveals that the Death Star's superlaser is powered by multiple reactors, allowing it to vary its destructive power depending on the target.
Skeptical of the station's power, Tarkin ordered that it first be tested on Jedha City using a single reactor.
Near the end of Rogue One, a second single-reactor test would destroy their installation on Scarif, along with the Rebel strike force who had successfully stolen the station's plans.
This is consistent with the canon continuity in Star Wars, since the destruction of the planet Alderaan would be the first time the Death Star fired the superlaser with all reactors employed so Tarkin could declare the battlestation "fully operational".

The canonical population of the first Death Star was 1.7 million military personnel, 400,000 maintenance droids, and 250,000 civilians/ associated contractors and catering staff.

The first Death Star was defended by thousands of turbolasers, ion cannons and laser cannons, plus a complement of seven to nine thousand TIE fighters, along with tens of thousands of support craft.
It also had several massive docking bays, including dry docks capable of accommodating Star Destroyers.
The 2014 book Star Wars:
Tarkin detailed the life of Grand Moff Tarkin, and prominently featured the first Death Star.
The theme of the construction of the Death Star is continued in the 2016 book, Catalyst: A Rogue One Novel, which tells the story of the development of the Death Star's superweapon by the scientist, Galen Erso and Krennic's deception of him.

It also reveals how Poggle worked with Krennic on the Project but then turned on him.

===
Second Death Star ===
Return of the Jedi features the DS-2 Orbital Battle Station still under construction as it orbits the forest moon of the planet Endor.
Besides it being larger, it also fixed the flaws found in its predecessor, so the Rebel Alliance's only hope is to destroy it prior to its completion.
The Emperor and Darth Vader send the Rebels false information that the station's weapons systems are not yet operational in order to lure the Alliance fleet into a trap, resulting in the decisive Battle of Endor.
Compared to its predecessor, the second Death Star's superlaser is more advanced as it can be fired every few minutes instead of needing 24 hours to recharge, while improved targeting computers could track smaller targets such as capital ships.
The unfinished battle station had been protected by a planetary shield projector deployed on the forest moon of Endor, but this was taken out by a ground assault team led by Han Solo with the help of the native Ewoks.
Rebel pilots Wedge Antilles and Lando Calrissian flew into the reactor core, with Antilles in his X-wing first taking out the power regulator with proton torpedoes, and Calrissian in the Millennium Falcon (co-piloted by Nien Nunb) striking the main reactor with concussion missiles, setting off a chain reaction that destroyed the battle station.
An early draft of the film featured two Death Stars at various stages of completion.
The second Death Star is featured in the cover of the book Star Wars:
Aftermath (2015), which also features many flashbacks to the destruction of the second Death Star, as well as the events directly after its destruction.
One of the main characters in the story personally escaped the explosion of the Death Star.
The destruction of the second Death Star was also shown in holograms in the book.
The 2015 comic book Star Wars:
Shattered Empire also explores the days following the destruction of the second Death Star from the perspective of Poe Dameron's parents, who were pilots during the event.
The video game
Star Wars:
Uprising also takes place during the aftermath of the second Death Star's destruction, and features a hologram of its description on multiple occasions in and out of cutscenes.
Part of the wreckage of the second Death Star appears in The Rise of Skywalker (2019), on the ocean moon Kef Bir.
Rey visits the wreckage to obtain Darth Sidious' wayfinder, a device that points the way to his hidden lair on Exegol.

===
Similar superweapons ===
The 2019 comic Star Wars #68 reveals that the Rebels considered creating their own version of a Death Star by luring Star Destroyers to a tectonically unstable planet and setting it off with proton detonators.

====
Starkiller Base ====
The Force Awakens features Starkiller Base, the kyber crystal-rich planet once called Ilum which has been converted into a superweapon by the First Order.
Significantly larger than the first and second Death Stars, and unlike either of those cost-prohibitive space stations, this superweapon cut costs by terraforming an existing planet.
The base draws its raw firepower directly from a star but it requires time to draw enough energy—
this stored energy is enough to obliterate multiple planets at once, making it a far deadlier superweapon than the Death Star.

In the film, the weapon is used to simultaneously destroy five New Republic planets within the same star system.
General Hux gives an incendiary speech while Starkiller Base demonstrates its lethality by obliterating the five planets of the Hosnian Prime system (at that time the location of the New Republic's government, which rotated every few years).
After Rey was captured by Kylo Ren, he interrogated her within the base.
Han, Chewbacca and Finn approached the base at light-speed because Starkiller's shield kept out anything going under the speed of light.
They found Rey and successfully lowered the protective shields, enabling an X-wing assault led by Poe Dameron  and Nien Nunb to destroy the superweapon, with Poe firing the crucial, destructive shots.
As the Resistance forces flee, Starkiller Base implodes, forming a star.

The name Starkiller Base pays homage to the early drafts of the original Star Wars film, referring to Luke Skywalker's original surname.
Coincidentally, the name "Starkiller" is an alias given to Galen Marek by Darth Vader in the 2008 game, Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed.
During early concept development, artist Doug Chiang envisioned the superweapon's gun as set inside a volcano, which X-wings would have to enter in a maneuver similar to the trench run on the Death Star in the original film.

====
Final Order fleet ====
In The Rise of Skywalker, the ninth installment in the series, the resurrected Darth Sidious is revealed to have created a new Sith Empire, the Final Order, on the hidden planet of Exegol, where his Sith Eternal cultists constructed the Final Order fleet, a massive fleet of Xyston-class Star Destroyers.
Each of these vessels was armed with an axial superlaser that could destroy planets; one of these ships was deployed ahead of the main fleet and used to destroy a planet known to harbor Resistance members.
Later, a small force of Resistance ships was forced to confront the entire fleet of Sith Star Destroyers; at the moment before they would be overwhelmed, however, surprise reinforcements from all over the galaxy led by Lando Calrissian arrived and wiped out the fleet of planet-destroying warships.

===
Legends ===
Both Death Stars and similar superweapons appear throughout the non-canonical Star Wars Legends continuity.

National Public Radio's A New Hope adaptation (1981) portrays Leia (Ann Sachs) and Bail Organa's (Stephen Elliott) discovery of the Death Star's existence and how Leia obtained its schematics.
The 1983 Star Wars arcade game and numerous LucasArts titles recreate the movies' attacks on the Death Stars.

Kevin J. Anderson's Jedi Academy trilogy (1994) introduces the Maw Cluster of black holes that protect a laboratory where the Death Star prototype was built (consisting of the superstructure, power core, and superlaser).
The first level of LucasArts' Dark Forces (1995) gives mercenary Kyle Katarn the role of stealing the plans which are subsequently given to Leia.
Steve Perry's novel Shadows of the Empire (1996) describes a mission that leads to the Rebels learning of the second Death Star's existence, and that mission is playable in LucasArts' X-Wing Alliance space flight simulator (1999).
The Death Star itself is a controllable weapon for the Empire in the Rebellion (1998) and Empire at War (2006) strategy game.
In Battlefront II  (2005), the player participates in a mission to secure crystals used in the Death Star's superlaser.
Another mission in the game tasks the player with acting as a stormtrooper or Darth Vader in an attempt to recover the plans and capture Leia.

The first Death Star under construction acts as the final stage in the video game
The Force
Unleashed
(2008).The first Death Star's construction is the subject of Michael Reaves and Steve Perry's novel Death Star (2007), which depicts the many politics and hidden agendas behind the massive project, from its construction up until its final destruction.
The hardcover edition charted on the US bestsellers list in its first week after release.
The first Death Star is depicted in various sources of having a crew of 265,675, as well as 52,276 gunners, 607,360 troops, 30,984 stormtroopers, 42,782 ship support staff, and 180,216 pilots and support crew.
Its hangars contain assault shuttles, blastboats, Strike cruisers, land vehicles, support ships, and 7,293 TIE fighters.
It is also protected by 10,000 turbolaser batteries, 2,600 ion cannons, and at least 768 tractor beam projectors.
Various sources state that the first Death Star has a diameter of between 140 and 160 kilometers.
There is a broader range of figures for the second Death Star's diameter, ranging from 160 to 900 kilometers.

====
DS-X Prototype Battle Station ====
In the Legends works Death Star (2007), Dark Empire II, Jedi Search and Champions of the Force, an experimental Death Star prototype, DS-X (
a durasteel frame surrounding a reactor core, superlaser, engines and a control room) was conceived by Grand Moff Wilhuff Tarkin as a test bed for the first Death Star.
It was constructed by Bevel Lemelisk and his engineers at the Empire's secret Maw Installation.
The prototype measured 120 kilometers in diameter.
Its superlaser was only powerful enough to destroy a planet's core, rendering it an uninhabitable "dead planet".
The targeting system on the prototype was never calibrated and the superlaser was inefficient, leaving the weapon's batteries drained.
The prototype had no interior except a slave-linked control room, hyperdrive engines and other components; the station operated with skeleton-crew of 75 personnel.
Although Star Wars creator George Lucas confirmed that the plans featured in Attack of the Clones and the under-construction facility in Revenge of the Sith was the original Death Star, Star Wars:
The New Essential Chronology retconned the DS-X prototype into being separate from the main Death Star.

====
Death Star III ====
In the Disney attraction Star Tours
- The Adventures Continue, guests can travel inside an incomplete Death Star during one of the randomized ride sequences.
In the original Star Tours, a Death Star III is seen and destroyed during the ride sequence by the New Republic.
Leland Chee originally created the third Death Star to explain why a Death Star is present on the Star Tours ride when both of the stations in the movies were destroyed.
The station being built near the Forest Moon of Endor like the second Death Star before.
It is similar to an original concept for Return of the Jedi, where two Death Stars would have been built near Had Abbadon (then the Imperial capital world).
The Habitation spheres, based on the Imperials' suspicious claims that they were designed strictly for peaceful purposes, were suggested by some fans to have been the origin for the Death Star III.
This was later revealed to be the case in Part 2 of the StarWars.com Blog series The Imperial Warlords: Despoilers of an Empire.
In the Legends game Star Wars: Tiny Death Star, a random HoloNet entry states that one of the residents of the Death Star is simply staying there until he can afford to stay at the third Death Star.
====
Other superweapons ====
A prototype version of the Death Star can be found in Kevin J. Anderson's novel Jedi Search (1994).
It was kept at the Maw Installation, an Imperial research institute in a cluster of black holes, and later deployed by Tol Sivron after the Maw Installation was invaded by the New Republic.
The prototype was ineffective, missing its target and instead destroying an Imperial garrison moon the sole time it was fired in combat.
After this, the prototype was later destroyed when it was led into the black holes of the cluster.

In the original Marvel Star Wars comic series, a superweapon called "The Tarkin" is built.
It is described as being similar to the Death Star but with more energy.
Darth Vader commands it and Luke, Leia, Chewbacca, C-3PO, and R2-D2 sabotage it with Lando's help.
It is finally destroyed by an Imperial officer attempting to use an ionic weapon to both attack the escaping Rebels and assassinate Vader.

In the Dark Empire comic series (1991–95), the reborn Emperor Palpatine's flagships Eclipse and Eclipse II Super Star Destroyers (Star Dreadnoughts) have a miniaturized version of the Death Star superlaser.
The first Eclipse was under construction at the time of the Emperor's death at Endor; shortly thereafter, it was briefly captured by pirates, who quickly abandoned it as an obvious target for the Rebels.
The vessel was retrieved by remnants of the Empire and completed, and later served as the flagship of the resurrected Palpatine.
It was destroyed by a Force storm enhanced by Luke and Leia, who had been brought aboard by the Emperor in hopes that they could be converted to the dark side.
The Eclipse II was mostly identical to its predecessor save for a handful of visual changes, and fulfilled the same purpose.
It was later destroyed when an errant projectile from the destroyed Galaxy Gun, another superweapon developed under the returned Palpatine, fell onto the ship and caused a massive explosion that destroyed not only the ship and its accompanying fleet, but also the nearby Imperial citadel of Byss.

In Kevin J. Anderson's novel Darksaber (1995), Death Star designer Bevel Lemelisk is recruited by the Hutts to build a superlaser weapon.
Due to their refusal to sufficiently fund and supply the project, the resultant 'superweapon' is quickly destroyed by a combination of the tumultuous Hoth asteroid field in which it was built and the efforts of the New Republic.
Lemelisk is captured and incarcerated by the Republic, and is later executed for his hand in the design and construction of Imperial superweapons.

The novel Children of the Jedi (1995) involves the return of Eye of Palpatine, a "colossal, asteroid-shaped" super dreadnaught constructed at the behest of Emperor Palpatine during the second year of the Galactic Civil War.
The Imperials lose control of the Eye when a Jedi uses the Force to hijack the main computer with their spirits.

==
Cultural influence ==
The Death Star placed ninth in a 2008 20th Century Fox poll of the most popular movie weapons.
It has been referred to outside of the Star Wars context in such examples as:
AT&T Corporation's logo introduced in 1982 is informally referred to as the "Death Star".
Ars Technica referred to "the AT&T Death Star" in an article criticizing a company data policy.
Competitor T-Mobile mocked AT&T's "Death Star" logo and "Empire-like reputation" in a press release.

In Kevin Smith's first feature film, Clerks (1994), one of the main characters points out that many independent contractors would have been killed in the second Death Star's destruction.
In the DVD audio commentary for Attack of the Clones, George Lucas says that the inclusion of the holographic Death Star in the film implies that the Geonosians were the contractors discussed by "Jay and Silent Bob".

KTCK (SportsRadio 1310
The Ticket) in Dallas were the first to use the term "Death Star" to describe the new mammoth Cowboys Stadium, now AT&T Stadium, in Arlington, Texas.
The term has since spread to local media and is generally accepted as a nickname for the stadium.

The Death Star strategy was the name Enron gave to one of their fraudulent business practices for manipulating California's energy market.

In the novels of the Bridge Trilogy, the San Francisco Police Department admonishes its officers to stop referring to their surveillance satellite as the "Death Star".

The Sonic the Hedgehog video game series features a parody of the Death Star known as the Death Egg, a battle station created by Dr. Eggman that serves as a level in multiple games.

Donald Trump's 2020 presidential campaign has referred to itself as the "Death Star".

Las Vegas Raiders owner Mark Davis dubed the nickname of the team's new Allegiant Stadium in Paradise, Nevada as the "Death Star".
===
Science ===
In 1981, following the Voyager spacecraft's flight past Saturn, scientists noticed a resemblance between one of the planet's moons, Mimas, and the Death Star.
Additionally, a few astronomers sometimes use the term "Death Star" to describe Nemesis, a hypothetical star postulated in 1984 to be responsible for gravitationally forcing comets and asteroids from the Oort cloud toward Earth.

===
Merchandise ===
Kenner and AMT created a playset and a model, respectively, of the first Death Star.
In 2005 and 2008, Lego released models of Death Star II and Death Star I, respectively.

In 1979, Palitoy created a heavy card version of the Death Star as a playset for the vintage range of action figures in the UK, Australia and Canada.
Both Death Stars are part of different Micro Machines three-packs.
The Death Stars and locations in them are cards in Decipher, Inc.'s and Wizards of the Coast's Star Wars Customizable Card Game and Star Wars Trading Card Game, respectively.
Hasbro released a Death Star model that transforms into a Darth Vader mech.
Estes Industries released a flying model rocket version.
A Death Star trinket box was also released by Royal Selangor in 2015, in conjunction with the December screening of Star Wars: The Force Awakens that year, and in 2016, Plox released the official levitating Death Star Speaker in anticipation of that year's screening of Rogue One: A Star Wars Story.
===
Petitions ===
In 2012–13, a proposal on the White House's website urging the United States government to build a real Death Star as an economic stimulus and job creation measure gained more than 30,000 signatures, enough to qualify for an official response.
The official (tongue-in-cheek) response was released in January 2013: the cost of building a real Death Star has been estimated at $850 quadrillion by the Lehigh University, or about 13,000 times the amount of mineable resources on Earth, while the International Business Times cited a Centives economics blog calculation that, at current rates of steel production, the Death Star would not be ready for more than 833,000 years.
The White House response also stated "the Administration does not support blowing up planets," and questioned funding a weapon "with a fundamental flaw that can be exploited by a one-man starship" as reasons for denying the petition.
The Luxembourgish magician Christian Lavey (born as Christian Kies) submitted a petition for the construction of a Death Star to the Luxemburgish parliament.
However, on an interview with a local radio station Lavey admitted that this petition was just a joke and some kind of protest against the space plans of the government.

==
References ==
Footnotes
Citations


==
External links ==
Death Star in the StarWars.com Databank
Death Star on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
NASA Engineer Says It Would Be Easier To Build A Death Star On Asteroid
Wookiees () are fictional humanoid aliens in the Star Wars universe, native to the forest planet Kashyyyk.
They are distinguished from humans by their gigantism, hirsutism and physical strength.
The most prominent Wookiee is Chewbacca, co-pilot of the Millennium Falcon alongside his best friend, Han Solo.

==
Inspiration ==
According to an interview with creator George Lucas, the inspiration for the Wookiee was Lucas' dog, Indiana (whose name is used in the Lucas-inspired Indiana Jones movies).
"
He was the prototype for the Wookiee.
He always sat beside me in the car.
He was big, a big bear of a dog.
"
During the climactic chase scene in THX 1138, one of the robotic cops, voiced by actor Terry McGovern, improvises: "I think I ran over a Wookiee back there", and thus the word was born.
Wookey was the surname of a friend of Terry's, Ralph Wookey, and Terry
thought it would be a funny in-joke to include his friend's name in the soundtrack for THX-1138.In one episode of Animal Planet's series Animal Icons, focusing on the creation of Star Wars figures
, it was revealed that the Wookiees were also based on orangutans and lemurs, which are long-haired creatures that live in a hot forest climate.
The net effect in terms of the Wookiees' appearance is a marked resemblance to descriptions of the legendary Sasquatch of the Pacific Northwest.

== Depiction ==


===
Physical characteristics ===
Adult Wookiees are typically taller than most humans, averaging 2.21 meters (7 feet 3 inches).
They possess enormous strength; Solo states that a Wookiee can pull a man's arms out of his sockets if angered or slighted, and in books and comics no humanoid species is shown to equal a Wookiee in pure strength.
Wookiees have a keen sense of smell, are fully covered with a thick coat of hair, have good hand–eye coordination, and are shown to be excellent marksmen.
Wookiees have been shown in many diverse environments, such as those of Hoth, Tatooine and Endor, never wearing any protective clothing or showing any signs of discomfort.
Wookiees have a lifespan of several hundred years.

===
Culture ===
Wookiees are devoted, loyal friends and are very distrustful of strangers.
Life debt is sacred to them.

Despite a fearsome appearance and temperamental disposition, Wookiees are very intelligent and are very adept at handling advanced technology, despite inferior technology.
Chewbacca is co-pilot of and performs maintenance on the Millennium Falcon, and also possesses a working knowledge of robotics, managing to haphazardly reassemble C-3PO after he was destroyed by Imperial stormtroopers in The Empire Strikes Back.
Wookiees are fast learners; Chewbacca commandeers an Imperial AT-ST during the Battle of Endor and is shown effectively maneuvering the vehicle and operating its weapons systems, he also fought during the clone wars alongside grand master Yoda.

Wookiees greatly value morality, courage, compassion, and loyalty.
A sacred and ancient Wookiee tradition is that of the honor family.
An honor family comprises a Wookiee's closest friends and companions.
These family members pledge a commitment to lay down their lives for one another, as well as members of any honor families these individuals may have.
Like the similarly sacred Wookiee life debt, Wookiees are willing to extend this tradition to members outside their species.
Chewbacca considered Han Solo, Leia Organa Solo, their children, and Luke Skywalker part of his honor family.
Wookiees have an understanding of Star Wars– universe warfare and fought alongside Republic forces during the Clone Wars.
Wookiees were betrayed and enslaved shortly after that conflict, as well as on certain occasions during the war by the Separatist Alliance.

Some Wookiees are sensitive to the Force.
One such Wookiee is Lowbacca, Chewbacca's nephew, from the book series Young Jedi Knights, although that story is no longer considered canon.

Some Wookiees are also prominent and successful bounty hunters, such as Black Krrsantan, due to their strength and ferocity.

===
Language ===
The most common Wookiee language is Shyriiwook.
However, other dialects used by native Wookiees from Kashyyyk are Thykarann and Xaczik.
Wookiees are capable of understanding Galactic Basic, but generally none are able to speak it because of the structure of Wookiee vocal cords.
In the original Star Wars trilogy, it seems that Chewbacca can understand humans.
His human partner, Han Solo, also shows knowledge of Shyriiwook, or can at least understand Chewbacca; in Solo it is shown that Han does indeed have the ability to speak Shyriiwook at a rudimentary level.
In the Star Wars expanded universe novels, Chewbacca builds a miniature translator droid ("Em Teedee") for his nephew Lowbacca when he later begins training as a Jedi, to facilitate communications with his fellow students.

===
Weapons ===
In the Star Wars films, Chewbacca carries a bowcaster, the traditional weapon developed and used by Wookiees.
Bowcasters launch quarrels, which are crossbow bolts that through magnetic propulsion appear as elongated blaster bolts due to their velocity.
The propulsion technique gives the quarrels extremely high stopping power.
Chewbacca in particular is shown to be an excellent shot, killing a Stormtrooper who was attempting to escape on a speeder bike in Return of the Jedi.
The spring that powers the bowcaster is extremely hard to pull back; humans are generally incapable of cocking a bowcaster, although Han Solo was seen to do so.

==
Home planet ==
Kashyyyk (), also known as Wookiee Planet C, is a fictional planet in the Star Wars universe.
It is the tropical, forested home world of the Wookiees.

In the original scripts for Return of the Jedi, the Second Death Star was to be built in orbit around Kashyyyk by Wookiee slave labor, with the primitive Wookiees ultimately helping the rebels to fight off the Imperial garrison.

However, Lucas decided that since the Wookiee Chewbacca, being co-pilot and mechanic on the Millennium Falcon, was clearly proficient with advanced technology, it would be confusing to show the Wookiees with a primitive, "stone age" culture.
Endor and the Ewoks were created instead to serve this purpose.
Lucas has also said that he originally planned Yavin IV, the location of the rebel base in Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope, to be the Wookiee home planet, but subsequent rewrites changed this to Kashyyyk.

===
In media ===
FilmsKashyyyk was first seen in the Star Wars Holiday Special (1978), as the program's frame story takes place there, with the backdrop of the planet being taken directly from concept art by Ralph Mcquarrie.
In the Holiday Special, the first mention of the planet carries the pronunciation "ka-ZOOK".

The planet was more extensively seen in Star Wars:
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith, in which Jedi Master Yoda goes to Kashyyyk to aid the Wookiees in their battle against the Droid Army.
In Revenge of the Sith the Wookiees live in the lush forests and giant jungles on the planet, in villages among the giant wroshyr trees.
Phuket, Thailand was used for main photography, while the backdrops for Kashyyyk were filmed in Guilin, a city in southern China, which is famous for its karst formations.

BooksThe planet's unique biosphere was first detailed in The Wookiee Storybook.
The planet was revealed to be a densely forested planet, on which one can encounter vast plains and island areas suitable for large, sweeping battles.
It was in this book that the family of Chewbacca once again appears in a situation similar to that of the Holiday Special.
The planet appears in several other books, as well.
Among them are:

A Forest Apart by Troy Denning
The Han Solo Trilogy, by Ann C. Crispin.
While the reader actually visits Kashyyyk for the first time in Book Three ("Rebel Dawn"), we hear about it (and meet Chewbacca) in Book Two, "The Hutt Gambit".

The Black Fleet Crisis trilogy by Michael P. Kube-McDowell
Heir to the Empire by Timothy Zahn
the Young Jedi Knights series
the New Jedi Order series by various authorsComicsKashyyyk also features in issue #91 of the Marvel Comics Star Wars and in the newspaper comic strip "The Kashyyyk Depths", by artist Russ Manning.
In the "Chewbacca" comic series, set during the New Jedi Order era, many scenes are set on Kashyyyk as well.
It is written as 'Kazhyyk' in Way of the Wookiee!
in the Marvel Illustrated Books.
November 1981.
ISBN 0-9604146-8-1

Video gamesKashyyyk also appears in the video games Star Wars: Galaxies, Star Wars: Galactic Battlegrounds, Star Wars: Battlefront, Star Wars: Battlefront II,
Star Wars:
Republic Commando, Star Wars:
The Clone Wars, Star Wars: Empire at War, Lego Star Wars: The Video Game, Lego Star Wars:
The Complete Saga, Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed, Star Wars Battlefront II (2017 video game), and Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic.
The latter takes place 4000 years before the Galactic Empire, with the Wookiees being oppressed by the slavers of Czerka Corporation.
In addition, Kashyyyk appears in the 2019 video game Star Wars Jedi:
Fallen Order.

Theme park attractionKashyyyk also appears in the various Disney theme parks attraction Star Tours - The Adventures Continue.

===
Fictional history ===
Early daysIn the millennia before the rise of the Galactic Republic
, Kashyyyk was a member world of the Infinite Empire.
Its surface was terraformed by the Rakata, resulting in the abnormally large foliage which still covers the planet's surface in modern times.
Its ecology can be politely described as a "layered deathtrap", the planet's surface being encompassed in shadow by wroshyr trees that are many miles high.
The dangerous and hostile animals increase closer to the forest floor.
Hidden on the planet's surface is a Star Map, another piece in the puzzle of the location of the Star Forge.

Czerka Corporation and slaveryWhen Kashyyyk was discovered by the Czerka Corporation's explorers, around 4,000 BBY (Before the Battle of Yavin), it was given the catalogue name G5-623, sometimes known as Edean.
Czerka conducted extensive Wookiee-slaving operations on "Edean", as well as hunting several of its species almost to extinction.

To ensure a relatively peaceful presence, Czerka supported the installation of friendly chieftains into power over the native tribes and would then prop them up with mercenaries and weapons shipments.
In response, the chieftains would train their tribe to understand Galactic Basic (ostensibly to "know thine enemy" but in reality to make them better slaves) and allow Czerka to enslave a percentage of the tribe's population.
Eventually Czerka was driven out by Revan and rebel Wookiees.

The Clone WarsDuring the epic Clone Wars of 22 to 19 years
BBY, Kashyyyk fought on the side of the Galactic Republic.
During one such battle, Yoda of the Jedi Council flew to Kashyyyk to assist in the fighting.
This particular battle, known as the Battle of Kashyyyk, would be one of the last few battles fought in the Clone Wars before the fall of the Republic and the rise of the Empire.
During this battle, Order 66 was initiated and Commander Gree, along with an unidentified Clone Scout Trooper, attempted to kill Yoda.
The clone duo failed to kill the Jedi master and they were both decapitated.
Yoda later escaped with the help from his friends and prominent Wookiees, Chewbacca and Tarfful.
After this, the clones successfully defended the planet from Separatist advances.
Quinlan Vos (who survived, but was wounded) was on Kashyyyk during Order 66, as was Luminara Unduli (who was killed by Commander Faie).
Also, unknown to some, just before Order 66 was given, an elite squad of clones known as Delta Squad had arrived, delaying the Separatist forces advance on Kashyyyk, before the arrival of Republic reinforcements.

The "Dark Times"During the period of the Galactic Empire's reign, Kashyyyk, like all other planets in the galaxy, was forced into obeying the policies of the Empire.
On one such occasion, following the destruction of the first Death Star, the Empire, under the direction of Darth Vader, went on a search for the rebels responsible.
Kashyyyk was put under a blockade, along with Tatooine, in an attempt to locate Han Solo and Chewbacca.
It was on a day when Chewbacca was returning home to his family to celebrate the sacred Wookiee holiday of Life Day that the Empire raided Chewie's home.
They did not find him.

Darth Vader also discovers his secret apprentice Galen Marek while raiding Kashyyyk in The Force Unleashed.

On another such occasion, the Rebel Alliance, before the destruction of the first Death Star, attempted to raid the planet with Han Solo.
The plan is to free the Wookiee population from enslavement.
The Empire stops them.
Han Solo flees in the Millennium Falcon.

The New RepublicFollowing the defeat of the Empire, Kashyyyk joined the New Republic and its successor state the Galactic Alliance, formed by the leaders of the Rebel Alliance.
In the novel Inferno, large portions of Kashyyyk are destroyed in retaliation for their acceptance of several Jedi who opposed Darth Caedus's regime.

==
Notable Wookiees ==
Chewbacca is the loyal friend and first mate of Han Solo, and serves as co-pilot on Solo's spaceship, the Millennium Falcon.
Gungi is a male Wookiee who is training to be a Jedi.
Gungi appears in Star Wars: The Clone Wars.
Gungi was trained by Ahsoka Tano and was in the top of his class.
Lowbacca is a Jedi knight and the nephew of Chewbacca.
He studied at Luke Skywalker's Jedi Praxeum and was a companion of Jaina Solo.
He wielded a bronze-bladed lightsaber.

==
"Let the Wookiee win" ==
In A New Hope, when Chewbacca is upset after losing a game of dejarik (a game similar to chess) against R2-D2, Han Solo says "It's not wise to upset a Wookiee...droids don't pull people's arms out of their sockets when they lose.
Wookiees are known to do that".
In response C-3PO says "I suggest a new strategy, R2:
let the Wookiee win".
This phrase (sometimes referred to by its initialism LTWW) has gained the proverbial meaning of "In trivial disputes, let the person who cares more have their way."

It can also be interpreted as advice to avoid arguments, especially those with shallow motivation such as to appear more intelligent than one's opponent.

The phrase and the attitude it expresses have been criticized as potentially justifying the enabling of an abuser.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Wookiee in the StarWars.com Databank
Wookiee on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Princess Leia Organa is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise, portrayed in films by Carrie Fisher.
Introduced in the original Star Wars film in 1977, Leia is princess of the planet Alderaan, a member of the Imperial Senate and an agent of the Rebel Alliance.
She thwarts the sinister Sith lord Darth Vader and helps bring about the destruction of the Empire's cataclysmic superweapon, the Death Star.
In The Empire Strikes Back (1980), Leia commands a Rebel base and evades Vader as she falls in love with the smuggler Han Solo.
In Return of the Jedi (1983), Leia helps in the operation to rescue Han from the crime lord Jabba the Hutt, and is revealed to be Vader's daughter and the twin sister of Luke Skywalker.

The prequel film Revenge of the Sith (2005) establishes that the twins' mother is Senator (and former queen)
Padmé Amidala of Naboo, who dies after childbirth, while their father is none other than former Jedi Knight Anakin Skywalker, who would become Darth Vader.
Leia is adopted by Senator Bail and Queen Breha Organa of Alderaan.
In the sequel trilogy, Leia is the founder and General of the Resistance against the First Order.
She and Han have a son named Ben Solo, who adopted the name Kylo Ren after turning to the dark side of the Force and became the lead enforcer for the First Order.
In The Rise of Skywalker (2019), it is revealed that Leia was briefly trained as a Jedi by her brother sometime after Return of the Jedi.
In the film, Leia is the mentor of Rey, the last remaining Jedi.
Leia dies towards the end of the film, but returns in the epilogue scene as a Force ghost alongside Luke.

One of the more popular Star Wars characters, Leia has been called a 1980s icon, a feminist hero and model for other adventure heroines.
She has appeared in many derivative works and merchandising, including the now-noncanonical Star Wars Expanded Universe, and has been referenced or parodied in several TV shows and films.
Her 'cinnamon bun' hairstyle from Star Wars (1977) and metal bikini from Return of the Jedi have become cultural icons.
Fisher was nominated for the Saturn Award for Best Actress twice for A New Hope and Return of the Jedi.
Fisher later received two Saturn Award nominations for Best Supporting Actress, the first for The Force Awakens and the second being a posthumous nomination for The Last Jedi.

==
Creation and casting ==
Leia was created by Star Wars creator George Lucas, who in 1999 explained his early development of the main characters:
The first [version] talked about a princess and an old general.
The second version involved a father, his son, and his daughter; the daughter was the heroine of the film.
Now the daughter has become Luke, Mark Hamill's character.
There was also the story of two brothers where I transformed one of them into a sister.
The older brother was imprisoned, and the young sister had to rescue him and bring him back to their dad.

In the rough draft of Star Wars, Leia is the spoiled teenage daughter of King Kayos and Queen Breha of Aquilae, with two brothers, Biggs and Windy; Biggs returned to the fourth draft as a childhood friend of Luke.
Leia was at one point "the daughter of Owen Lars and his wife Beru ...
Luke's cousin–together they visit the grave of his mother, who perished with his father on a planet destroyed by the Death Star.
"
A later story synopsis establishes Leia as "Leia Antilles", the daughter of Bail Antilles from the peaceful world of Organa Major.
In the fourth draft it was established that "Leia Organa" came instead from Alderaan.
Fisher was 19 when she was cast as Princess Leia, with actresses including Amy Irving, Cindy Williams and Jodie Foster also up for the role.
In 2014, InkTank reported that the extended list of "more than two dozen actresses" who had auditioned for Leia included Glenn Close, Farrah Fawcett, Jessica Lange, Sissy Spacek, Sigourney Weaver, Cybill Shepherd, Jane Seymour, Anjelica Huston, Kim Basinger, Kathleen Turner, Geena Davis, Meryl Streep, and Terri Nunn.
Asked about Streep in 2015, Fisher said, "I've never heard that one.
But Jodie Foster was up for it...
that one I knew the most.
Amy Irving and Jodie.
And I got it."

On Leia's 'cinnamon bun' hairstyle, George Lucas stated that "In the 1977 film, I was working very hard to create something different that wasn't fashion, so I went with a kind of Southwestern Pancho Villa woman revolutionary look. ...
The buns are basically from turn-of-the-century Mexico."
Lucas later noted that Leia's mother, Padmé Amidala, wears a similar-looking Hopi hairstyle in Revenge of the Sith.
A photo depicting famous Mexican revolutionary Clara de la Rocha wearing a similar hairstyle exists in the Lucas Museum of Narrative Art archives.
In 2015, Mental Floss cited research suggesting that while female Mexican revolutionaries did not have such elaborate hairstyles, young marriageable Hopi women did, and their "squash blossom whorls" superficially resemble Leia's hair buns.
Leia's hairstyle may have also been inspired by that of Queen Fria in the 1939 Flash Gordon comic strip "The Ice Kingdom of Mongo", and scientist Barnes Wallis' wife Molly (played by Ursula Jeans) in the 1955 war film The Dam Busters.
Comparisons have also been made to the 4th-century-BC Iberian sculpture Lady of Elche, as well as the 1920s "earphones" hairstyle.
Composer John Williams created a musical leitmotif for Leia which recurs throughout the Star Wars saga. "
Princess Leia's Theme" was recorded as a concert suite (4:18 length) for the score of the 1977 film.

The second draft of the Return of the Jedi screenplay contained dialogue in which Obi-Wan tells Luke he has a twin sister.
She and their mother were "sent to the protection of friends in a distant system.
The mother died shortly thereafter, and Luke's sister was adopted by Ben's friends, the governor of Alderaan and his wife."
Fisher explained in 1983: "Leia's real father left her mother when she was pregnant, so her mother married this King Organa.
I was adopted and grew up set apart from other people because I was a princess."
==
Character ==
Anthony Breznican of Entertainment Weekly describes Leia as a "diplomat, spy, warrior, undercover agent".
Mark Edlitz calls her "a smart, feisty, brave diplomat and warrior" in The Huffington Post.
Fisher told Rolling Stone in 1983:
There are a lot of people who don't like my character in these movies; they think I'm some kind of space bitch.
She has no friends, no family; her planet was blown up in seconds ...
so all she has is a cause.
From the first film [Star Wars], she was just a soldier, front line and center.
The only way they knew to make the character strong was to make her angry.
In Return of the Jedi, she gets to be more feminine, more supportive, more affectionate.

She said in 2014:

I would rather have played Han Solo.
When I first read the script I thought that's the part to be, always wry and sardonic.
He's always that.
I feel like a lot of the time
Leia's either worried or pissed or, thank God, sort of snarky.
But I'm much more worried and pissed than Han Solo ever was, and those aren't fun things to play ...
I had a lot of fun killing Jabba the Hutt.
They asked me on the day if I wanted to have
a stunt double kill Jabba.
No!
That's the best time I ever had as an actor.
And the only reason to go into acting is if you can kill a giant monster.

==
Appearances ==


===
Skywalker saga ===


====
Original trilogy ====


=====
A New Hope =====
Introduced in the original 1977 film Star Wars, Princess Leia Organa of Alderaan is a member of the Imperial Senate.
She is captured by Darth Vader (portrayed by David Prowse, voiced by James Earl Jones) on board the ship Tantive IV, where she is acting as a spy for the Rebel Alliance.
Leia has secretly hidden the blueprints for the Death Star, the Empire's moon-sized battle station, inside the astromech droid R2-D2 (Kenny Baker) and has sent it to find one of the last remaining Jedi, Obi-Wan Kenobi (Alec Guinness), on the nearby planet of Tatooine.
Vader arrests Leia and has her tortured, but she resists revealing anything.
Death Star commander Grand Moff Tarkin (Peter Cushing) threatens to destroy her home planet Alderaan with the Death Star unless she reveals the location of the hidden Rebel base.
She provides the location of an old, abandoned base on the planet Dantooine, but Tarkin orders Alderaan to be destroyed anyway.
Leia is rescued by Luke Skywalker (Mark Hamill) and Han Solo (Harrison Ford), and they escape aboard Han's ship, the Millennium Falcon.
After analyzing the Death Star's schematics, the Rebels find a tiny weakness in the battle station, which Luke uses to destroy it in his X-wing fighter.
In the aftermath of the victory, Leia bestows medals on the heroes at the hidden Rebel base on Yavin 4.

Alyssa Rosenberg of The Washington Post writes of Leia in the film:
Leia's nerves as a revolutionary are clear from the moment she arrives on screen ...
She takes shots at the Storm Troopers boarding her ship, gets stunned with a blaster in her hand, then has the audacity to try to make Darth Vader feel ashamed of himself ...
She has enough energy left over after a nasty session of torture to insult Grand Moff Tarkin.
And while she grieves when her home planet, Alderaan, is destroyed by the Death Star, Leia's not paralyzed: when her unexpected rescuers show up, she’s ready to go, and to gripe about their operational sloppiness.

Rosenberg also notes that, though Han is almost immediately attracted to Leia, they conflict because she insists on asserting command and he automatically resists, even as she proves herself to be worthy of it.
And despite her initial disdain for the smuggler, whom she sees as selfish, Leia later acknowledges "I knew there was more to you than money" when Han comes through for the Rebellion.
Fisher told Rolling Stone in 1980 that in the original script, when Luke and Han come to rescue a captured Leia, "I was hanging upside down with yellow eyes, like in The Exorcist ...
Some form of radar torture was done to me
and I was in a beam, bruised and beaten up, suspended in midair.
The reason it was cut from the film was because I was unconscious and the Wookiee would have had to carry me for, like, the next fifteen minutes."
=====
The Empire Strikes Back =====
In The Empire Strikes Back (1980), Leia is at the Rebel base on Hoth.
She leads its evacuation during an Imperial attack, and then flees with Han, Chewbacca (Peter Mayhew) and C-3PO (Anthony Daniels) on the Millennium Falcon.
They dodge pursuing Imperial TIE fighters by flying into an asteroid field when the Falcon's hyperdrive breaks down, with Leia piloting the ship at one point.
Romance blossoms between Leia and Han during their flight from the Empire; while hiding in the stomach of a space slug, they finally share a kiss.
With his ship needing repairs, Han seeks out his old friend Lando Calrissian
(Billy Dee Williams) in Cloud City, the floating city over Bespin.
Though he welcomes them graciously, Lando soon turns them over to a newly arrived Darth Vader, who hopes to use them as bait to capture Luke.
Leia confesses her love for Han as he is frozen in carbonite and then handed over to bounty hunter Boba Fett (Jeremy Bulloch), who is charged with bringing him to the crime lord Jabba the Hutt.
Lando helps Leia, Chewbacca and the two droids escape.
Leia senses that Luke is in trouble, and goes back to save him after he is nearly killed during a lightsaber duel and confrontation with Vader.

Rosenberg notes:

Yes, it's slightly ridiculous ... that [Han] tries to pry a confession of affection out of her on Hoth, as Leia is trying to manage an evacuation with just an ion cannon for defense.
But Han's not wrong that if Leia doesn't figure out that she's a person with needs, she's going to burn out ...
In a way, it's an early confession of love:
Han’s anxious about the bounty hunters who are still pursuing him ...
But he would stay and give his love and support to Leia if she could just acknowledge that she needs him.

=====
Return of the Jedi =====
In Return of the Jedi (1983), Leia infiltrates Jabba the Hutt's palace on Tatooine disguised as the Ubese bounty hunter Boushh, and brings a captive Chewbacca with her as part of the ruse.
She frees Han from the carbonite, but they are recaptured by Jabba.
Leia is now chained to Jabba as his slave, outfitted in a metal bikini.
After Luke arrives and kills Jabba's Rancor, Jabba sentences Luke, Han and Chewbacca to be fed to the Sarlacc.
Lando (disguised as a guard) helps them overpower their captors, and Leia seizes the moment to strangle Jabba with her chain.
Luke and Leia swing to safety, blowing up Jabba's barge behind them.
Later, the heroes go to the forest moon of Endor to prepare for a battle with the Empire.
There, Luke reveals to Leia that she is his twin sister and that Vader is their father.
Leia joins Han in leading the Rebels in battle with Imperial troops as the Rebel Fleet attacks the second Death Star.
Leia is slightly injured, but the Rebels, with help from the Ewoks, ultimately defeat the forces of the Empire, with the Death Star destroyed once more.

Fisher told Rolling Stone in 1983, "In Return of the Jedi, [Leia] gets to be more feminine, more supportive, more affectionate.
But let's not forget that these movies are basically boys' fantasies.
So the other way they made her more female in this one was to have her take off her clothes."
Rosenberg writes of Han and Leia:
And we know those two crazy kids are locked for life in Return of the Jedi when it turns out that Han has accepted a Generalship in the Rebellion, keeping it a secret from Leia.
In A New Hope, Leia was grumbling about the quality of Han as a rescuer ...
But when she finds out what Han's done, accepting a rank he once found insulting and a mission she knows to be dangerous, Leia is the first person to volunteer to join his strike team.
In Star Wars, that's what love looks like:
trusting your partner’s commitment to the cause and respecting his strategic and technical judgement.

In the film, Leia says that she has vague memories of her real mother, who she describes as "kind... but sad".
Bouzereau quoted Lucas in 1997:
The part that I never really developed is the death of Luke and Leia's mother.
I had a backstory for her in earlier drafts, but it basically didn't survive.
When I got to Jedi, I wanted one of the kids to have some kind of memory of her because she will be a key figure in the new episodes
I'm writing.
But I really debated whether or not Leia should remember her.

====
Prequel
trilogy ====
=====
Revenge of the Sith =====
In the prequel film Revenge of the Sith (2005), Padmé Amidala (Natalie Portman) is pregnant with Anakin Skywalker's (Hayden Christensen) twins near the end of the Clone Wars.
After Anakin turns to the dark side of the Force and becomes Darth Vader, Padmé gives birth to Luke and Leia on Polis Massa and then dies.
Leia is adopted by Senator Bail Organa (Jimmy Smits) and his wife Queen Breha (Rebecca Jackson Mendoza) of Alderaan.

Film critic Peter Travers of Rolling Stone wrote, "As we watch Anakin nearly melt in the lava, only to be put together, Frankenstein style, in a lab while Lucas intercuts scenes of Padme giving birth to the twins Luke and Leia, a link to genuine feeling is established at last."
====
Sequel
trilogy ====
=====
The Force Awakens =====
In March 2013, Fisher confirmed that she would reprise her role as Leia in Star Wars:
The Force Awakens.
Set 30 years after Return of the Jedi, The Force Awakens reintroduces a Leia who is "a little more battle weary, a little more broken hearted".
In November 2015, director J. J. Abrams said of Leia, "She's referred to as General but ...
there's a moment in the movie where a character sort of slips and calls her 'Princess.'
"
Commenting on the story he added, "The stakes are pretty high in the story for her, so there's not much goofing around where Leia's concerned.
"
Asked how Leia is handling things in the film, Fisher said, "Not easily ...
[she is] solitary.
Under a lot of pressure.
Committed as ever to her cause, but I would imagine feeling somewhat defeated, tired, and pissed.
"In
the film, Leia is the leader of the Resistance, a group formed by the New Republic to fight a proxy war with the First Order (a group formed by the remnants of the Empire) and trying to find Luke, who disappeared years earlier.
When her forces foil a First Order attack searching for the Resistance astromech droid BB-8, Leia is reunited with Han, who has helped the renegade stormtrooper Finn (John Boyega) and orphaned scavenger Rey (Daisy Ridley) bring the droid this far.
Han and Leia have been estranged for many years; their marriage fell apart after their son, Ben Solo (Adam Driver), fell to the dark side and became the First Order commander Kylo Ren.
Leia believes Ben can still be brought back to the light side.
Han volunteers for a mission to infiltrate the First Order's Starkiller Base to disable its defensive shields.
Confronting Ren, Han tries to convince his son to leave the First Order, but Ren instead impales his father on his lightsaber.
Leia senses Han's death through the Force, and later shares a moment of grief with Rey, who had thought of Han as a mentor and father figure.
Leia sees Rey, Chewbacca, and
R2-D2 off when they depart to locate Luke, saying, "may the Force be with you".

Asked why Leia is not shown to be a Jedi in The Force Awakens (as she is in the Star Wars Expanded Universe works), Abrams told IGN, "It was a great question, and one that we talked about quite a bit, even with Carrie [Fisher].
Why did she not take advantage of this natural Force strength that this character had.
And one of the answers was that it was simply a choice that she made, that her decision to run the Rebellion, and ultimately this Resistance, and consider herself a General, as opposed to a Jedi.
It was simply a choice that she took".
He also added, "I would like to think that there really isn't much of a ticking clock, and it's never too late ...
clearly we've seen, and we do again, that she still is Force strong.
And it's something that I think is an intrinsic piece of her character.
Fisher was nominated for a 2016 Saturn Award for Best Supporting Actress for her portrayal.

=====
The Last Jedi =====
In December 2015, producer Kathleen Kennedy confirmed that Fisher would reprise the role of Leia in the next installment, then known as Star Wars:
Episode VIII, but later named Star Wars: The Last Jedi.
Fisher died on December 27, 2016, after going into cardiac arrest.
It was confirmed that she had completed filming her role in the film shortly before her death.
In the film, Leia is among those on the bridge of her flagship, the Raddus, who are expelled into space when the ship is attacked by the First Order.
Leia uses the Force to pull herself back to the ship.
After recovering, she shoots and stuns Resistance pilot Poe Dameron (Oscar Isaac), who has mutinied against her successor, Vice Admiral Holdo (Laura Dern).
From his solitude on Ahch-To, Luke projects himself through the Force to the Resistance stronghold on Crait and reunites with Leia, apologizing for what happened to Ben.
Leia replies that she knows her son is gone, but Luke reassures her that "no one's ever really gone".
While Luke distracts Kylo and his attacking First Order troops, Leia is among the remaining Resistance forces who escape from Crait in the Millennium Falcon.

=====
The Rise of Skywalker =====
Following Fisher's death, Variety reported that she was slated to appear in Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker and speculated that Lucasfilm would need to find a way to address her death and what would become of her character.
Filming began on August 1, 2018.
Lucasfilm announced in January 2017 that they had "no plans to digitally recreate Carrie Fisher's performance as Princess or General Leia Organa".
In April 2017, Fisher's family granted Disney and Lucasfilm the rights to use recent footage of the late actress in The Rise of Skywalker.
However, Kennedy subsequently said that Fisher would not appear in the film.
In July 2018, it was announced that Fisher would appear as Leia in The Rise of Skywalker, using unseen footage from The Force Awakens.
Initially, there had also been plans to use additional unseen footage of Leia from The Last Jedi, but it was ultimately not included in the ninth film.
Fisher's daughter Billie Lourd, who portrayed Lieutenant Connix in all three sequel trilogy films, also stepped in as Leia for a brief flashback in the film in which her face was digitally replaced by Fisher's likeness, using imagery from Return of the Jedi.
In the film, Leia continues to lead the Resistance while offering guidance and support to Rey as she continues her training to become a Jedi.
A flashback reveals that Leia had abandoned her own training after she had a vision foretelling her son's death if she finished.
While Rey and Ren duel on Kef Bir, a dying Leia uses all of her remaining strength to reach out to her son.
Distracted after sensing his mother's death, Ren is stabbed by Rey with his own lightsaber.
Leia passes away, making Rey experience overwhelming guilt.
Rey heals Ren's wound using the Force.
After the Battle of Exegol, a redeemed Ben Solo sacrifices the remainder of his life force to resurrect a dead Rey, and he vanishes at the same time as Leia becomes one with the Force.
Rey then returns to the Lars homestead on Tatooine and buries the lightsabers that had belonged to Leia and her father, Anakin Skywalker as the spirits of Luke and Leia look on with pride, with Rey honoring them by adopting the surname "Skywalker".
===
Anthology films ===


====
Rogue One:
A Star Wars Story ====
Leia makes a brief appearance in the final scene of the 2016 film Rogue One, receiving the plans for the Death Star as a lead-up to the beginning of A New Hope.
Since this movie takes place prior to the original Star Wars trilogy, a very young Leia was required.
To achieve that effect, a computer-generated image of a young Carrie Fisher was superimposed over Norwegian actress Ingvild Deila's face; archival audio of Fisher saying "Hope" was used to voice the character.

===
Television ===
Leia appears briefly in 1978's Star Wars Holiday Special television film as a leader and administrator of the new Rebel Alliance base.
She and C-3PO contact Chewbacca's wife Mallatobuck for assistance in finding Chewbacca and Han.
Leia also appears in the cartoon segment at a different Rebel Base, located in an asteroid field, and at the Life Day ceremony at the end of the film.
Fisher also appeared in and hosted the November 18, 1978, episode of Saturday Night Live that aired one day after the holiday special.

====
Star Wars Rebels ====
A teenage version of Princess Leia, voiced by Julie Dolan, appears in a 2016 episode of the animated series Star Wars Rebels, which is set between Revenge of the Sith and A New Hope.
In the episode, Leia is sent on a secret mission to assist the titular rebels.
Executive producer Dave Filoni said of the appearance:
We thought we had an opportunity to show her learning to be a leader, experimenting with the personality that becomes the stronger more resolute character you see in A New Hope.
One of the complex challenges of depicting Leia in Rebels is that we have to remind the audience that at this point she is part of the Empire.
She doesn't believe in the Empire, but she is acting the part, almost a double agent.

====
Star Wars Forces of Destiny ====
Leia appears in the animated series Star Wars Forces of Destiny, voiced by Shelby Young.

====
Star Wars Resistance ====
Leia appears in the animated series Star Wars Resistance, voiced by Rachel Butera and Carolyn Hennesy.

===
Novels ===
Leia makes her first literary appearance in Star Wars: From the Adventures of Luke Skywalker, the novelization of the original 1977 film Star Wars, which was released six months before the film in November 1976.
Credited to Lucas but ghostwritten by Alan Dean Foster, the novel was based on Lucas' screenplay.
Leia later appeared in the novelizations
The Empire Strikes Back (1980) by Donald F. Glut and Return of the Jedi (1983) by James Kahn.
She is also a point-of-view character in the 2015 novelization of The Force Awakens by Foster.
Foster's 1978 novel Splinter of the Mind's Eye was commissioned by Lucas as the basis for a potential low-budget sequel to Star Wars should the film prove unsuccessful.
In the story, Luke and Leia seek a crystal on a swampy planet and eventually face Vader in combat.

Leia also appears in the Journey to Star Wars:
The Force Awakens line of novels and comic books, introduced in conjunction with The Force Awakens to connect the film with previous installments.
She is the lead character in the young adult novel Moving Target: A Princess Leia Adventure (2015) by Cecil Castellucci and Jason Fry, which is set between The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi, and Claudia Gray's novels Star Wars: Bloodline (2016) and Leia: Princess of Alderaan (2017).
The former is set six years before The Force Awakens, while the latter features a 16-year-old Leia before the events of A New Hope.
===
Comics ===
Leia is the lead character in the five-part comic limited series Star Wars: Princess Leia (2015), taking place immediately after Episode IV: A New Hope.
She is also featured prominently in the four-part comic limited series Star Wars: Shattered Empire (2015), set immediately after Return of the Jedi.
Princess Leia reveals Leia to have had royal training in martial arts and explores her reaction to the destruction of Alderaan, while Shattered Empire portrays her as a skilled pilot who undertakes a dangerous mission alongside Poe Dameron's mother.
In Princess Leia and Shattered Empire, Leia senses the past while on Naboo (briefly envisioning her mother and Darth Maul, respectively), and in Star Wars #12, she uses a lightsaber as a weapon for the first time, canonically.
===
Legends works ===
The original three Star Wars films have spawned a large franchise of works that include novels, comic books, and video games.
Leia appears in much of this material.
In April 2014 (with the sequel film The Force Awakens in production), Lucasfilm excluded the Star Wars Expanded Universe from official Star Wars canon, rebranding it as Star Wars Legends.
In this continuity, Leia continues her adventures with Han and Luke after Return of the Jedi, fighting Imperial resurgences and new threats to the galaxy.
She becomes the Chief of State of the New Republic and a Jedi master, and is the mother to three children by Han: Jaina, Jacen and Anakin Solo.

====
Novels ====
The 1991 New York Times bestselling novel Heir to the Empire by Timothy Zahn began what would become a large collection of works set before, between and especially after the original films.

=====
Post-Return of the Jedi =====
The bestselling Thrawn trilogy (1991–93)
by Timothy Zahn begins five years after the events of Return of the Jedi.
In Heir to the Empire (1991), Leia is married to Han and three months pregnant with twins.
Noghri commandos repeatedly attempt to kidnap her as part of Grand Admiral Thrawn's plan to restore the Empire and crush the New Republic.
In Dark Force Rising (1992), Leia realizes that Darth Vader and the Empire deceived the Noghri to secure their allegiance, and by revealing the truth she turns the alien race to the side of the New Republic.
At one point, she remembers her adoptive parents on Alderaan, implying that the "mother" she discussed with Luke on Endor was Queen Breha.
In The Last Command (1993), Leia gives birth to the twins Jaina and Jacen Solo on Coruscant during Thrawn's siege.
Leia, now the Chief of State of the New Republic, is a minor character in the Jedi Academy trilogy (1994) by Kevin J. Anderson, set after the Thrawn trilogy.
Next in the timeline is the Callista trilogy: Children of the Jedi (1995) by Barbara Hambly, Darksaber (1995) by Anderson and Planet of Twilight (1997) by Hambly.
In The Crystal Star (1994) by Vonda McIntyre, young Jacen, Jaina and their three-year-old brother Anakin are kidnapped in a plot to restore the Empire, but are rescued by Leia and Chewbacca.
Leia struggles with the responsibilities of her position in The Black Fleet Crisis trilogy (1996) by Michael P. Kube-McDowell.
In The New Rebellion (1996) by Kristine Kathryn Rusch, she avoids an assassination attempt and then aids in the defeat of the Dark Jedi Kueller, whom she shoots to death.
The Corellian trilogy (1995) by Roger MacBride Allen finds Han and Leia swept up in a civil war while visiting his homeworld of Corellia with their children.
In the two Hand of Thrawn novels by Timothy Zahn (1997's Specter of the Past and 1998's Vision of the Future), Leia tries to hold the New Republic together as Moff Disra conspires for its volatile factions to destroy each other.
Leia appears periodically in the Young Jedi Knights series (1995–98) by Kevin J. Anderson and Rebecca Moesta.
The 14-volume young adult fiction series covers the Jedi training of Jacen and Jaina.
In The Truce at Bakura (1993) by Kathy Tyers, set one day after the ending of Return of the Jedi, Leia establishes New Alderaan, a sanctuary for the destroyed planet's surviving inhabitants.
The spirit of Anakin Skywalker appears to Leia and pleads for her forgiveness, but she angrily banishes him.
The six-volume Jedi Prince series (1992–93) by Paul Davids and Hollace Davids, later contradicted by other novels, is set within a year after Return of the Jedi.
In The Glove of Darth Vader (1992), the self-proclaimed son of the defeated Emperor Palpatine, Trioculus, seeks the titular glove to cement himself as the new Emperor.
Entranced by Leia's beauty in The Lost City of the Jedi (1992),
Trioculus vows to make her his queen.
He captures her in Zorba the Hutt's Revenge (1992), but Jabba the Hutt's vengeful father, Zorba, offers to trade his own prisoner Ken—Palpatine's real grandson whom Trioculus has been seeking—for Leia, his son's killer.
But Leia and Ken are rescued and Trioculus is frozen in carbonate by Zorba.
Mission from Mount Yoda (1993) finds Ken's father Triclops alive and willing to join the Rebels against the Empire.
Leia, now engaged to Han, is captured by Zorba in Queen of the Empire (1993).
Trioculus is revived and seizes Leia before Zorba can kill her.
Leia is rescued and replaced with a lookalike droid decoy, which kills Trioculus.
In Prophets of the Dark Side (1993), Leia looks forward to her wedding to Han and has a vision of their two children.
Matthew Stover's 2008 standalone novel Luke Skywalker and the Shadows of Mindor picks up the story soon after, as Luke, Leia and the Rebels fight the Sith Lord Shadowspawn.

In The Courtship of Princess Leia (1994) by Dave Wolverton, set immediately before the Thrawn trilogy, Leia is presented with an advantageous political marriage to Prince Isolder of the planet Hapes.
A jealous Han abducts Leia and takes her to the planet Dathomir; Luke and Isolder follow, and there they all find the hidden forces of the Imperial warlord Zsinj.
Defeating him, Han and Leia marry.
The 2003 novels A
Forest Apart and Tatooine Ghost by Troy Denning are set immediately after The Courtship of Princess Leia.
The newly married Leia fears that any children she has may succumb to the dark side like her father.
During an adventure on Tatooine in Tatooine Ghost, she discovers the diary of her grandmother Shmi Skywalker and meets some of young Anakin's childhood friends.
When she learns of Anakin's childhood as a slave and the traumatic death of his mother, Leia learns to forgive her father.

=====
Works set between films =====
In Shadows of the Empire (1996) by Steve Perry, the only Star Wars novel set between The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi, Leia is searching for Boba Fett to find a captive Han.
She is bewitched by the crime lord Prince Xizor using pheromones, but Chewbacca helps her elude the seduction.
Allegiance (2007) and Choices of One (2011) by Timothy Zahn are set between Star Wars:
A New Hope and The Empire Strikes Back, and feature Leia and her cohorts seeking new allies for their Rebellion against the Empire.
Razor's Edge (2013) by Martha Wells and Honor Among Thieves (2014) by
James S. A. Corey take place in the same time period and also chronicle the adventures of Leia and Han.

=====
New Jedi Order =====
In the New Jedi Order series (1999–2003), Leia resigns as Chief of State, and on the heels of her warnings before the Senate, the alien Yuuzhan Vong invade the galaxy.
They destroy system after system and defeat both the Jedi and the New Republic forces in countless battles.
Chewbacca dies in Vector Prime (1999) by R.A. Salvatore, which sends Han into a deep depression that causes a rift between him and Leia.
They reunite after Leia is gravely wounded at the Battle of Duro in Kathy Tyers' Balance Point (2000).
She is targeted by a deadly Voxyn slayer in Troy Dennings' Star By Star (2001), and though she manages to evade death, her son Anakin is later killed during a mission to prevent more Voxyn from being cloned.
The Vong are finally defeated in The Unifying Force (2003) by James Luceno.

In Denning's The Dark Nest trilogy (2005), Leia, Han and several Jedi become involved in an escalating border dispute between the Chiss and the insidious insectoid Killiks, and Leia makes a bitter enemy in the Twi'lek warrior Alema Rar.
In The Joiner King (2005), Leia asks Saba Sebatyne to train her as a Jedi Knight.
R2-D2 malfunctions in The Unseen Queen (2005) and shows Luke a holoclip of his father Anakin and a pregnant woman, whom Luke learns is his and Leia's biological mother, Padmé Amidala.
Anakin and Padmé are discussing a dream of Anakin's in which Padmé dies in childbirth; later, Luke and Leia watch a clip in which Padmé is talking to Obi-Wan Kenobi about Anakin.
Tenel Ka, Queen Mother of the Hapes Consortium, has a daughter, Allana, secretly fathered by Jacen.
In The Swarm War (2005), Luke and Leia view holoclips of their mother's death, and Leia is promoted to Jedi Knight.

=====
Legacy of the Force =====
The bestselling Legacy of the Force series (2006–08) chronicles the crossover of Han and Leia's son Jacen to the dark side of the Force while the Jedi, Solos and Skywalkers fight against his growing power.
In Betrayal (2006) by Aaron Allston, Jacen turns to the dark side, believing that it is the only way to save the galaxy from the chaos brewing among the member systems of the Galactic Alliance.
Jacen realizes in Bloodlines (2006) by Karen Traviss that the Sith discipline will require him to kill one of his loved ones, which he decides is an acceptable sacrifice to save the galaxy.
In Troy Denning's Tempest (2006), Han and Leia thwart the assassination of Tenel Ka and Allana, but become caught up in a Corellian conspiracy.
They are almost killed when the Millennium Falcon is attacked by a Star Destroyer controlled by an increasingly powerful Jacen—who knows that his parents are on board.
With Han injured, Leia and Lando further investigate the Corellians in Aaron Allston's Exile (2007), but Alema reappears to exact her vengeance on Leia.
Sacrifice (2007) by Karen Traviss finds Leia and Han on the run, hunted by Jacen as traitors to the Galactic Alliance.
He kills Luke's wife Mara Jade as his final sacrifice to become Darth Caedus, the new ruler of the Sith.
In Inferno (2007) by Troy Denning, Han and Leia are faced with the reality that their son, now Joint Chief of State, is the enemy.
Leia attempts unsuccessfully to manipulate Jacen in Aaron Allston's Fury (2007)
so that the Jedi can both thwart him and neutralize Alema.
Finally, in Invincible (2008) by Troy Denning, Jaina kills Jacen in a lightsaber duel.
At Tenel Ka's request, Leia and Han adopt Allana, disguised with the name "Amelia" to protect her from any future vengeance against Cadeus or the Hapes Consortium.
Multiple novels in the series made the New York Times Best Seller list.
The nine-volume Fate of the Jedi series (2009–12) by Aaron Allston, Troy Denning and Christie Golden finds Han and Leia become caught up in the intensifying conflict between the Galactic Alliance and the Jedi.
In the wake of Darth Cadeus' death, the now-peaceful Galactic Alliance harbors a growing mistrust toward the Jedi, and the situation is worsened by a Force-induced psychosis that begins afflicting individual Jedi, sending them on violent rampages.

In Millennium Falcon (2008) by James Luceno, set between Legacy of the Force and Fate of the Jedi, a mysterious device hidden inside the eponymous spacecraft sends Han, Leia and Allana on an adventure to investigate the ship's past before it came into Han's possession.
Troy Denning's Crucible (2013), set after Fate of the Jedi and the last novel to date in the Star Wars Legends chronology, reunites Leia, Han and Luke with Lando as they aid him to thwart a vast criminal enterprise threatening his asteroid mineral refinery in the Chilean Rift nebula.

====
Comics ====
Leia's youth is depicted in the non-canon Star Wars Tales story, The Princess Leia Diaries.
In it, she develops her disdain for the Empire, as well as a conflict with Tarkin.
She discovers and decides to support the Rebellion.

=====
Dark Empire =====
During the events of the comic series Dark Empire (1991–92), Palpatine has been resurrected in a young clone body and seduces Luke to the dark side of the Force as part of his plan to restore the Empire.
A captive Leia, resisting Palpatine's attempts to turn her as well, escapes with an artifact he needs to secure his power, the Jedi Holocron.
Luke pursues her, and Leia manages to turn him back.
Brother and sister then fight Palpatine with the light side of the Force, turning his own Force-generated storm against him and destroying Palpatine and his Star Destroyer.
In Dark Empire II (1994–95), Leia gives birth to a third child by Han, whom she names Anakin.
Palpatine is reborn in an inferior, rapidly deteriorating clone body in Empire's End (1995), and seeks to possess the body of the infant Anakin.

==
Cultural impact ==
Princess Leia has been called a 1980s icon, a feminist hero and "an exemplary personification of female empowerment".
In 2008, Leia was selected by Empire magazine as the 89th greatest film character of all time, and IGN listed her as their 8th top Star Wars hero.
UGO Networks listed Leia as one of their best heroes of all time in 2010.The character has been referenced or parodied in several TV shows and films, and celebrated in cosplay.
Fisher appeared in the Leia metal bikini on the cover of the Summer 1983 issue of Rolling Stone, and a painting of Leia and other characters surrounding Lucas appeared on the cover of the May 25, 1983 issue of Time announcing Return of the Jedi.
In 2013, cartoonist Jeffrey Brown published the bestselling Star Wars: Vader's Little Princess, a comic strip-style book featuring Darth Vader and a young Leia in humorous father-daughter situations.
Princess Leia appears on a 2007 US postage stamp and a 2015 UK stamp.

Leia has also been used in a wide range of Star Wars merchandise, including statuettes, action figures and other toys, household items and clothing, office supplies, food products, and bubble bath and shampoo in Leia-shaped bottles with her head as the cap.
In her one-woman show Wishful Drinking, Fisher called the Princess Leia Pez dispenser one of the "merchandising horrors" of the series.
In a 2011 interview, Fisher said:I signed away my likeness for free.
In those days, there was no such thing as a "likeness" ...
There was no merchandising tied to movies.
No one could have known the extent of the franchise.
Not that I don't think I’m cute or anything, but when I looked in the mirror, I didn't think I was signing away anything of value.
Lately I feel like I
’m
Minnie Mouse—the identity of Princess Leia
so eclipses any other identity that I’ve ever had.

After the 2012 acquisition of LucasFilm by the Walt Disney Company, the Disney Store stated in May 2014 that the company had "no plans for Leia products".
After public criticism, Disney told Time in June 2014 that it would be releasing several Leia products.
Funko has since produced several versions of Leia (at least one for each film) in their POP!
line of 4.5-inch vinyl figures in the Japanese super deformed style.
Hasbro is set to release an action figure of Leia as she appears in the Star Wars Rebels animated series.

===
"Cinnamon buns" hairstyle ===
Leia's unique hairdo in 1977's A New Hope has come to be known as the "doughnut" or "cinnamon buns" hairstyle, and is iconic of the character and series.
A February 1978 cover story for the British teen magazine Jackie included step-by-step instructions on how to replicate Leia's hair buns.
In the 1978 short film parody Hardware Wars, Princess Anne-Droid has actual cinnamon buns on the side of her head.
Miss Piggy of The Muppet Show copied the hairdo in a Star Wars-themed episode of the series in February 1980.
In the 1987 Mel Brooks comedy film Spaceballs, Princess Vespa (Daphne Zuniga) appears to have the hairstyle, which is soon revealed to
in fact be a large pair of headphones.
In the parody film Thumb Wars, the role of Leia was filled by a character named Princess Bunhead, who has two cinnamon rolls for hair.
In 2015, Fisher's daughter Billie Lourd's character in the horror-comedy TV series Scream Queens, a rich and disaffected sorority girl known as Chanel No.
3, wears earmuffs in every scene as an homage to Fisher's iconic Leia hairstyle.
Lourd also has a cameo in The Force Awakens (2015) in which she wears Leia's distinctive hair buns.

===
Feminist analysis ===
Leia has been the subject of feminist analysis.
Mark Edlitz wrote for The Huffington Post in 2010 that "Leia is an exemplary personification of female empowerment."
David Bushman, television curator at the Paley Center for Media, said in 2012, "From the male perspective ...
Princess Leia was a very creditable character for her time—not perfect, but certainly defiant, assertive, and strong."
Alyssa Rosenberg of The Washington Post wrote in 2015, "Leia wasn't just the first great heroine of science fiction and fantasy to capture my imagination.
She was one of the first characters I encountered whose power came from her political conviction and acumen.
"
In her 2007 article "Feminism and the Force: Empowerment and Disillusionment in a Galaxy Far, Far Away", Diana Dominguez cited Leia as a welcome change from the previous portrayals of women in film and TV.
She wrote:

Here was a woman who could play like and with the boys, but who didn't have to become one of the boys and who could, if and when she wanted to, show she liked the boys, a woman who is outspoken, unashamed, and, most importantly, unpunished for being so.
She isn't a flirty sex-pot, tossing her hair around seductively to distract the enemy ...
She doesn't play the role of "Maternal caretaker", although she does display caring and compassion, or "the sweet innocent damsel" who stands passively by while the men do all the work, but does step aside to let them do what they're good at when it is wise to do so ...
Leia is a hero without losing her gendered status; she does not have to play the cute, helpless sex kitten or become sexless and androgynous to get what she wants.
She can be strong, sassy, outspoken, bossy, and bitchy, and still be respected and seen as feminine.

Rosenberg writes that, though at first Luke is an apolitical innocent in search of adventure and Han is a detached opportunist in search of money, both are "influenced by Leia's passion [and] take their places as full participants in the Rebellion".
She notes, "Everyone else eventually comes around to Leia's view of the world."
Leia herself, singularly dedicated to her political movement against the Empire, "finds a partner in Han, acknowledging that personal happiness can help her sustain her commitment to building a better galactic order".
Rosenberg cites "Leia's willingness to see the best in him, and Han's desire to live up to her belief in him" as a foundation of their relationship, also pointing out his attempts to make her recognize that she has needs like anyone else and should acknowledge that she needs him.
In their 2012 essay "Lightsabers, Political Arenas, and Marriages", Ray Merlock and Kathy Merlock Jackson cite Leia as the successor of earlier science fiction heroines Wilma Deering of Buck Rogers and Dale Arden of Flash Gordon, and the embodiment of "a new stage in the ongoing presentation of the fairy-tale princess in jeopardy".
Writing that "after Leia, no longer would princesses be passive and salvaged simply with a kiss," they note the reflection of the character in later Disney Princess animated films and in woman warriors such as Ellen Ripley from the Alien franchise and Xena of the adventure TV series Xena:
Warrior Princess.
A. O. Scott of The New York Times described Leia as "a foremother of Hermione Granger and Katniss Everdeen and of countless latter-day Disney princesses.
She also foretold the recent, somewhat belated feminist turn in the Star Wars cycle
itself".
Mark Hamill described Fisher's performance as:
She was effortlessly feminist, you know?
She wasn't some shrinking violet that needed a guy to come rescue her.
In fact, she made Han and Luke look like chumps.
She was anything but what I expected.
I mean, I sort of thought
, "Well, she's 19, that's barely out of high school."
And in many ways, she was a lot older and wiser than I was.

Fisher herself described Leia as a "huge" feminist icon, dismissing the suggestion that the character was ever a "damsel in distress".
Fisher said of Leia, "She bossed them around.
I don't know what your idea of distress is, but that wasn't it!
And I wasn't some babe running through the galaxy with my tits bouncing around.
So I wasn't threatening to women".
She added, "I like Princess Leia.
I like how she was feisty.
I like how she killed Jabba the Hutt".
"
I think I am Princess Leia, and Princess Leia is me.
It's like a moebius striptease."
===
Metal bikini ===
Leia's slave costume when she is held captive by Jabba the Hutt at the beginning of Return of the Jedi—made of brass and dubbed Leia's "Metal Bikini" or "Gold Bikini"—immediately made the character (and Fisher) a "generational sex symbol" celebrated by pin-up posters, and later merchandising and cosplay.
The outfit has gained a cult following of its own.
Rosenberg noted that "the costume has become culturally iconic in a way that has slipped loose from the context of the scenes in which Leia wore it and the things she does after she is forced into the outfit."
Wired wrote in 2006, "There's no doubt that the sight of Carrie Fisher in the gold sci-fi swimsuit was burned into the sweaty subconscious of a generation of fanboys hitting puberty in the spring of 1983.
"
Acknowledging the opinion of some that the "Slave Leia" iconography tarnishes the character's position as "feminist hero", Rosenberg argues:

Leia may be captive in these scenes, but she's not exactly a compliant fantasy.
Instead, she's biding her time for the moment when she can put that fury into action, carrying out a carefully laid plan to rescue her lover.
And when that moment comes, the bikini doesn't condemn Leia to passivity.
She rises, and uses the very chains that bind her to strangle the creature who tried to take away her power by turning her into a sex object.

Science fiction filmmaker Letia Clouston concurs, saying "Sci-fi has had a long history of strong female characters.
Yes, Princess Leia was in a gold bikini, but she was also the one who single-handedly killed Jabba.
When you take into account movies and TV shows like Terminator, Aliens, Battlestar Galactica, and even video games like Metroid, you can see sci-fi has consistently promoted the strength of women more than any other genre."
==
Relationships ==


===
Family tree ===


===
Mentorship tree ===


==
See also ==
List of Kenner Star Wars action figures
Solo family


==
References ==
Footnotes
Citations


==
External links ==
Princess Leia in the StarWars.com Databank
Princess Leia on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Leia Organa on IMDb
R2-D2 () or Artoo-Detoo is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise created by George Lucas.
He has appeared in ten of the eleven Star Wars films to date.
At various points throughout the course of the films, R2, an astromech droid, is a friend to C-3PO, Padmé Amidala, Anakin Skywalker, Leia Organa, Luke Skywalker, Obi-Wan Kenobi, BB-8, Rey and D-O. R2-D2 and his companion C-3PO are the only characters to appear in every Star Wars film, with the exception of Solo:
A Star Wars Story (2018).

English actor Kenny Baker played R2-D2 in all three original Star Wars films and received billing credit for the character in the prequel trilogy, where Baker's role was reduced as R2-D2 was portrayed mainly by radio controlled props and CGI models.
In the sequel trilogy, Baker was credited as consultant for The Force Awakens; however, Jimmy Vee also co-performed the character in some scenes.
Vee later took over the role beginning in The Last Jedi.
In The Rise of Skywalker, puppeteers Hassan Taj and Lee Towersey perform the role of R2-D2, replacing Jimmy Vee, who had played the role in the previous two films.
His sounds and vocal effects were created by sound designer Ben Burtt.

R2-D2 was designed in artwork by Ralph McQuarrie, co-developed by John Stears and built by Peteric Engineering.
The revised Empire Strikes Back droids had fibreglass shells built by Tony Dyson and his White Horse Toy Company.

== Design ==
George Lucas's creation of R2-D2 was influenced by Akira Kurosawa's 1958 feature film The Hidden Fortress (released in the United States in 1962), particularly Tahei and Matashichi, the two comic relief characters that serve as sidekicks to General Makabe.
Lucas and artist Ralph McQuarrie also drew inspiration from the robots Huey, Dewey, and Louie from Douglas Trumbull's 1972 film Silent Running.

The name derives from when Lucas was making one of his earlier films, American Graffiti.
Sound editor Walter Murch states that he is responsible for the utterance which sparked the name for the droid.
Murch asked for Reel 2, Dialog Track 2, in the abbreviated form "R-2-D-2".
Lucas, who was in the room and had dozed off while working on the script for Star Wars, momentarily woke when he heard the request and, after asking for clarification, stated that it was a "great name" before going back to writing his script.
R2-D2 stands for Second Generation Robotic Droid Series-2, according to a Star Wars encyclopedia published after the release of the film Star Wars.
Tony Dyson, owner of the special effects studio The White Horse Toy Company, was commissioned by special effects supervisor Brian Johnson to fabricate the revised mechanical design for the Empire Strikes Back, making several units operated by remote control.
A number were used by Baker, and two were stunt double models made for the scene where the droid was shot from the swamp onto the shore on Dagobah.

==
Appearances ==


===
Skywalker saga ===


====
Original trilogy ====


=====
Episode IV:
A New Hope =====
In A New Hope, R2-D2 and C-3PO (Anthony Daniels) are both introduced on board the Tantive IV, along with Princess Leia (Carrie Fisher) of Alderaan, when they are being pursued upon by Darth Vader (portrayed by David Prowse, voiced by James Earl Jones) aboard an Imperial Star Destroyer.
Leia inserts into R2-D2 an information disc containing the plans for the Death Star battle station, and encodes a distress message on the droid's holographic projector.
The droids then escape in a pod that crashes on Tatooine near Jedi Master Obi-Wan Kenobi's (Alec Guinness) desert abode.

R2-D2 and C-3PO are then abducted by Jawas and bought by Owen (Phil Brown) and Beru Lars (Shelagh Fraser), uncle and aunt of Luke Skywalker (Mark Hamill).
While Luke cleans the sand out of R2-D2's gears, he discovers a fragment of Leia's message, and removes the droid's restraining bolt to see more; once free of the bolt, R2 claims to have no knowledge of the message.
That night, R2-D2 leaves the farm to seek out Obi-Wan.
When Owen and Beru are killed by Imperial stormtroopers, Luke is forced to leave Tatooine with Obi-Wan, Han Solo
(Harrison Ford), and Chewbacca (Peter Mayhew) on board
the Millennium Falcon to deliver R2-D2 to the Rebel Alliance.
On their arrival at Alderaan's co-ordinates, they are pulled in by the Death Star's tractor beam and are forced to land, but eventually rescue Princess Leia.
After Vader kills Obi-Wan, the rest of the group escapes and delivers the Death Star plans to the Rebel Alliance.
R2 later serves as Luke's droid during the attack on the station.
R2-D2 is severely damaged during the battle, but is repaired before the ceremony at the end of the film.

=====
Episode V:
The Empire Strikes Back =====
In The Empire Strikes Back, R2-D2 accompanies Luke to Dagobah, and later to Cloud City, where he helps to rescue and repair a heavily damaged C-3PO and to override city security computers.
He also manages to reactivate the Millennium Falcon's hyperdrive, resulting in a last-minute escape from Imperial forces.

====
=
Episode VI:
Return of the Jedi =====
In Return of the Jedi, R2-D2 plays a critical role in rescuing Luke, Leia, and Han from Jabba the Hutt.
He later joins the Rebel strike team on Endor.
He is badly damaged during the battle between the Imperial troops and the Rebels, but is repaired in time for the celebration marking the second Death Star's destruction and the fall of the Empire.

====
Prequel
trilogy ====
=====
Episode
I: The Phantom Menace =====
In Episode I – The Phantom Menace, set 32 years before A New Hope, R2-D2 is portrayed as belonging to the Naboo defense forces, one of three astromech droids deployed for repair duty onboard Queen Padmé Amidala's (Natalie Portman) starship as it attempts to get past the Trade Federation blockade.
The sole survivor of the three, R2-D2 repairs the deflector shields and saves the day.
This is R2-D2's earliest appearance in the Star Wars universe and takes place at approximately 00:25:22 in the film.
Having proved his worth, R2-D2 then becomes part of
Jedi Master Qui-Gon Jinn's (Liam Neeson) party on Tatooine where he meets C-3PO and Anakin Skywalker (Jake Lloyd)..
Later still, he serves as the astromech droid for Anakin's starfighter during the Battle of Naboo.

=====
Episode II:
Attack of the Clones =====
In Episode II – Attack of the Clones, set 10 years after The Phantom Menace, R2-D2 again serves Anakin (Hayden Christensen) and Obi-Wan (Ewan McGregor).
He accompanies Anakin and Padmé to Naboo, and then to Tatooine when Anakin tries to rescue his mother Shmi (Pernilla August).
Here, he is reunited with C-3PO, and the two get into various misadventures on Geonosis.
He and C-3PO are later witness to Anakin and Padmé's secret wedding.

=====
Episode III: Revenge of the Sith =====
In Episode III – Revenge of the Sith, R2-D2 helps Anakin and Obi-Wan in their mission to rescue Chancellor Palpatine (Ian McDiarmid) from Count Dooku's (Christopher Lee) capital ship, the Invisible Hand.
He is attacked by battle droids, but defeats them through ingenious tactics.
After Anakin falls to the dark side of the Force and becomes Darth Vader, he takes R2-D2 with him when he goes to assassinate the Separatist council, but tells him to stay with the ship.
After the Galactic Empire is established at the end of the film, C-3PO's memory is erased to keep the knowledge of the locations of Vader and Padmé’s newborn children, Luke and Leia, a secret from their father.
However, R2-D2's memory is not wiped; as a result, R2-D2 is the only surviving character at the end of the saga who knows the entire story of the Skywalker family.
Both R2-D2 and C-3PO end up in the possession of Captain Raymus Antilles (Rohan Nichol) onboard the Tantive IV.

====
Sequel
trilogy ====
=====
Episode VII
: The Force Awakens =====
In Star Wars: The Force Awakens, set approximately 30 years after Return of the Jedi,
R2-D2 is revealed to be kept in storage at the Resistance base on the planet D'Qar, having put himself in a low-power mode after Luke Skywalker's disappearance.
He later awakens and reveals Luke's location by combining map data stored in his memory with that of the droid BB-8.
He then travels with Rey (Daisy Ridley) and Chewbacca to the planet highlighted on the map, where they find Luke in self-imposed exile.
In the credits, Kenny Baker was credited as 'R2-D2 consultant,' while Jimmy Vee provided an uncredited portrayal in some scenes.

=====
Episode VIII:
The Last Jedi =====
R2-D2 appeared in Star Wars:
The Last Jedi, with actor Jimmy Vee taking over the role from Kenny Baker, who retired from the role due to his age and health.
Baker died in August 2016.R2-D2 has a brief but pivotal role in the film, reuniting with Luke aboard the Millennium Falcon and showing him Leia's distress message from the original film in a successful attempt to convince Luke to train Rey.
He is later shown interfacing with the Falcon's computer while Rey and Chewbacca pilot the ship amid the final confrontation with the evil First Order’s forces.

=====
Episode IX:
The Rise of Skywalker =====
R2-D2 returns once more in Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker.
Initially remaining at the Resistance base, he is shown watching Leia as she dies.
He later plays an important role in restoring C-3PO's memory after Rey, Finn (John Boyega) and Poe Dameron (Oscar Isaac) are forced to erase it so the droid can translate a Sith artefact that holds a clue to the location of the Sith homeworld and the new fleet of the resurrected Palpatine.
R2-D2 accompanies Poe in his X-wing for the final assault, and is later shown joining the others in celebrating the defeat of Palpatine and the Sith Eternal.
===
Anthology films ===


====
Rogue One ====
R2-D2 makes a cameo appearance in Rogue One alongside C-3PO.
===
Television ===
R2-D2 and C-3PO had their own animated series, Star Wars: Droids, set before they came into Luke Skywalker's possession.
This was excluded from the new canon in 2014.R2-D2 appears in the 2008 animated film Star Wars:
The Clone Wars, and the subsequent TV series of the same name.
In the film, he accompanies Anakin (voiced by Matt Lanter) and his Padawan Ahsoka Tano (voiced by Ashley Eckstein)  on a mission to rescue Jabba the Hutt's son Rotta.
In the series, he helps them fight the Separatists.

R2-D2 also appears in Star Wars Rebels in the episodes "Droids in Distress" and "Blood Sisters".

R2-D2 appears with Luke Skywalker in the second season finale of the Disney+ series The Mandalorian.

===
Novels and comics ===
The novelization of Attack of the Clones makes it clear that R2-D2 has been in Padmé's possession since the events of The Phantom Menace.

R2-D2 appears in Marvel's 2015 Star Wars comic series, which is set between the films of the original trilogy.
He also appears briefly in the miniseries
Star Wars: Shattered Empire.
====
Legends ====
With the 2012 acquisition of Lucasfilm by The Walt Disney Company, most of the licensed Star Wars novels and comics produced since the originating 1977 film Star Wars were rebranded as Star Wars Legends and declared non-canon to the franchise in April 2014.

In the various Star Wars novels and comics, the droid duo have played a small but significant role.
In the Expanded Universe novel The Swarm War, R2-D2 inadvertently helps Luke and Leia come to grips with their heritage when an electronic glitch unearths long-concealed images of Anakin relating his fear of losing Padmé, and of Padmé's death.

In issue No.
12 of Star Wars: Legacy, R2-D2 is revealed to have survived the resulting 88 years after his last appearance and has been upgraded to the latest technology.
In this series, he now serves another member of the Skywalker family – reluctant Jedi Cade Skywalker.

===
Other films ===
Along with the Star Wars films, R2-D2 makes non-canon cameo appearances in several other films, such as Star Trek and Star Trek Into Darkness, where he was seen flying in debris, in Close Encounters of the Third Kind he is seen on the underside of the alien ship, in Raiders of the Lost Ark, he is seen on the wall of the room containing the Ark, and in Transformers:
Revenge of the Fallen, the robot was seen flying among rubble and debris in the sky.
In Ready Player One, R2-D2 is also seen as a toy model in Wade and Samantha'a apartment.
He also appears in the Wreck-
It
Ralph sequel, Ralph Breaks the Internet.

In an early script to 2014's The Lego Movie, R2-D2 was set to be one of the main characters, but was written out due to the directors failing to obtain the rights to the character.

==
Production ==
Several R2-D2 models were built for the original Star Wars films; one that was remote controlled and rolled on three wheeled legs, and others which were worn by English actor Kenny Baker and walked on two legs.
Deep Roy (who also doubled Yoda in several scenes), served as Baker's double, in both Episodes V and VI; providing stunts and filling in when Baker was unavailable.
The original props for Star Wars Episode IV:
A New Hope were designed by John Stears and built by Stears' team and Peteric Engineering.
The revised fibreglass droids used in The Empire Strikes Back were built by Tony Dyson and the White Horse Toy Company.
The radio controlled R2 was operated by John Stears in A New Hope, Brian Johnson in The Empire Strikes Back and by Kit West in Return of the Jedi.

Kenny Baker, who portrayed R2-D2 in costume, was not involved in the Star Wars Holiday Special.
R2 was portrayed entirely by a radio controlled unit, operated by Mick Garris (Lucas' receptionist at the time).
In the credits, R2-D2 is credited as playing himself.
Garris later went on to operate the radio controlled R2 at various events, including the Oscars.
There were a total of 15 R2-D2s
on the set of Attack of the Clones.
Eight were radio-controlled; two were worn by Baker; the remainder were stunt models that could be moved by puppet strings or towed by wires.
The robotic R2s were prone to failure, particularly while shooting the Tatooine scenes in Tunisia.
Radio controlled units were extensively utilised for the Prequel trilogy, due to advances in technology, though Baker was still used in some scenes.
R2-D2 had three principal operators: Don Bies, Jolyon Bambridge and Grant Imahara.
The sound effects for R2-D2's "voice" were created by sound designer Ben Burtt, using an ARP 2600 analog synthesizer, as well as his own vocalizations processed through other effects.
Original props of R2-D2 and C-3PO are used as Audio-Animatronics in the queue area of Disneyland's Star Tours–
The Adventures Continue attraction.

Although Kenny Baker is credited, Anthony Daniels (who portrays C-3PO) has stated that Baker did not film any scenes in Revenge of the Sith.
Baker himself has said he probably only appears in footage caught while shooting the previous two movies.
For The Force Awakens, producer Kathleen Kennedy hired two fans, Lee Towersey and Oliver Steeples, to build new R2-D2 robots for the film, after being impressed by their working replicas that were brought to Star Wars Celebration Europe in 2013.

==
Cultural influence ==
R2-D2 was inducted into the Robot Hall of Fame in 2003.
The Smithsonian Institution included R2-D2 in its list of 101 Objects that Made America.
The Phalanx CIWS is nicknamed R2-D2 due to the shape of the radar housing.
Marc Rotenberg of the Electronic Privacy Information Center called a security robot intended for schools and malls
R2-D2's "evil twin";
William Santana Li, who co-founded the company that built the robot, said he wanted people to think of the robot as "a mash-up of Batman, Minority Report and R2-D2".
R2-D2 and C-3PO guest starred in a series of segments of Sesame Street in 1978.
The two droids were featured as presenters at the 50th Academy Awards.

Ewan McGregor, who portrayed Obi-Wan Kenobi in the Star Wars prequel trilogy, said in an interview, "As soon as R2-D2 comes on the set, everyone goes a bit silly."
He said "there is something about him that makes you feel great affection for him".
In the DVD audio commentary for Revenge of the Sith, George Lucas says R2-D2 is his favorite character, and that it is intentional that R2-D2 saves the day at least once in every film.

R2-D2 is parodied in several episodes of Family Guy.
The final scene in "Blind Ambition" where Peter Griffin receives a medal of honor after a blind Peter saves Horace's life parodies the ending in the original 1977 Star Wars.
In the episodes parodying the original Star Wars trilogy, Cleveland Brown plays R2-D2's role, while Quagmire plays C-3PO.

The 2015 Israeli sci-fi comedy OMG, I'm a Robot!
features "Robo Joseph" – a "Jewish R2-D2" dubbed by Rob Schneider.

In 2015, Hasbro released a Bop It game using the design of R2-D2 on September 4, 2015 for "Force Friday".
The top part of the unit (his head) becomes the 'Bop It' button, the bottom part of his head becomes the 'Twist It' and his legs
are the 'Pull It'.
The game is based on the Bop It Micro Series and the voice is replaced with voice recordings from C-3PO.
Instead of the game saying "I'm going to sleep.
"
before the unit shuts off, this version says "I'll just switch off for a while.
"The
navigation system of the SR-71 plane has been 'affectionately' called R2-D2.
The system had like R2-D2 navigational purposes and was mounted behind the pilot directed upward.

The telescope dome of Zweibrücken Observatory in Germany was repainted to resemble R2-D2 in 2018.

In the Latin American Spanish dubbing of the Star Wars films, the name R2-D2 is pronounced as "Arturito" (Little Arthur), which sounds similar to the English pronunciation.
In the Italian version of the original trilogy, R2-D2 was named "C1-P8".
Anglicisms were not common in the Italian language during the 1970s and 1980s, and the names of various characters were changed to be easier to pronounce and recognize for Italian speakers.
Some of these changes were reverted in the dubbing of the prequel and sequel trilogies, where the original name R2-D2 was used instead.
Other name changes in the Italian version of the original trilogy include C-3PO, Han Solo, Leia Organa and Darth Vader, who were called respectively "D-3BO", "Ian Solo", "Leila Organa" and "Dart Fener" (or "Lord Fener").

==
References ==


===
Footnotes ===


===
Citations ===


==
Further reading ==
Wallace, Daniel.
(
2002).
Star Wars: The Essential Guide to Characters.
Del Rey.
p. 138.
ISBN 0-345-44900-2.
Note: Canon sources are mixed as to whether R2-D2 has a gender, but Wallace (an official source) indicates that the droid has masculine programming.

"Tony Dyson
The man behind Star Wars R2-D2".
Archived from the original on October 1, 2013.

==
External links ==
R2-D2 in the StarWars.com Databank
https://starwars.fandom.com/wiki/R2-D2
R2-D2 on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
C-3PO () or See-Threepio is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise who appears in the original trilogy, the prequel trilogy and the sequel trilogy.
Built by Anakin Skywalker, C-3PO was designed as a protocol droid intended to assist in etiquette, customs, and translation, boasting that he is "fluent in over six million forms of communication".
Along with his astromech droid counterpart and friend R2-D2, C-3PO provides comic relief within the narrative structure of the films, and serves as a foil.
Anthony Daniels has portrayed the character in ten of eleven of the Star Wars films released to date, with the exception of Solo:
A Star Wars Story, where the character does not appear.

Anthony Daniels is also the only person to be involved in all 11 Star Wars films.
Despite his oblivious nature, C-3PO has played a pivotal role in the galaxy's history, appearing under the service of Shmi Skywalker, the Lars homestead, Padmé Amidala, Bail Organa, Raymus Antilles, Luke Skywalker, Jabba the Hutt, and Leia Organa.
In the majority of depictions, C-3PO's physical appearance is primarily a polished gold plating, although his appearance varies throughout the films; including the absence of metal coverings in The Phantom Menace, a dull copper plating in Attack of the Clones, and a red left arm in The Force Awakens.
C-3PO also appears frequently in both canon and Star Wars Legends continuities of novels, comic books, and video games, and was a protagonist in the animated television series Droids.

==
Appearances ==


===
Skywalker saga ===


====
Original trilogy ====


=====
Star Wars (1977) =====
In Star Wars, C-3PO is introduced to the audience when he and R2-D2 are aboard the consular ship Tantive IV when it is attacked by the Imperial Star Destroyer Devastator.
When R2-D2 (Kenny Baker) attempts to leave the ship to deliver a secret message from Princess Leia (Carrie Fisher) to Obi-Wan Kenobi (Alec Guinness), C-3PO follows him into an escape pod, which lands on the planet Tatooine.
There, the droids are captured by Jawas, and are taken to be sold.
In the process of being sold to Owen Lars (Phil Brown), C-3PO convinces his new owner to buy R2-D2 as well (after they originally bought R5-D4 and his motivator exploded on the way back to the garage).
The duo ultimately lead Lars' nephew, Luke Skywalker (Mark Hamill), to Obi-Wan, for whom R2-D2 plays Leia's message.
After Imperial stormtroopers destroy the Lars homestead, C-3PO and
R2-D2 go along with Luke and Obi-Wan on a mission to rescue Leia, transported by smugglers Han Solo (Harrison Ford) and Chewbacca (Peter Mayhew) on board the Millennium Falcon.
When the ship is taken hostage on the Death Star, C-3PO helps R2-D2 shut down the space station's trash computer, saving their human companions' lives, before escaping on board the Falcon.
When R2-D2 is damaged during the Battle of Yavin, a grief-stricken C-3PO offers to donate his own parts to help repair his counterpart.
C-3PO and a repaired R2-D2 are present at the celebration of the Death Star's destruction at the end of the film.

Throughout the film C-3PO is a foil to R2-D2's antics, even when C-3PO translates R2-D2's machine speech for the audience.
C-3PO is originally the property of the captain on the Tantive IV, but seems to follow R2-D2 in a relationship akin to those between human children; C-3PO often following R2-D2 around, and R2-D2 needing C-3PO to translate for him.
When R2-D2 is damaged in the Battle of Yavin, C-3PO offers to donate any mechanical parts helpful in his repair; but this transference is never confirmed.

=====
The Empire Strikes Back (1980) =====
In The Empire Strikes Back, C-3PO is responsible for identifying the Empire's probe droid, alerting the Rebels to the Empire's awareness of their location on the sixth planet of the Hoth system.
C-3PO escapes with Han, Chewbacca, and Leia in the Millennium Falcon, while R2-D2 joins Luke in his search for Yoda (Frank Oz).
During this time C-3PO and Han are often shown as foils, with C-3PO quoting odds and Han defying them.
After a chase through an asteroid field, the Falcon escapes to Cloud City at Bespin.

While exploring a room in Cloud City, C-3PO is blasted by an off-camera stormtrooper.
In search of C-3PO, Chewbacca heads to the Ugnaught recycling facility where he finds the dismembered parts of the droid.
When Darth Vader (portrayed by David Prowse, voiced by James Earl Jones) reveals his presence to the group that same day, Chewbacca is sent into a holding cell, but is permitted to rebuild the droid, which he does poorly.
Thereafter, Chewbacca carries the partially rebuilt C-3PO on his back during Han's encasement in carbonite.

With the help of the city's administrator, Lando Calrissian
(Billy Dee Williams), Princess Leia, Chewbacca, and C-3PO escape the city.
Having C-3PO on Chewbacca's back proves to be beneficial, in that when Boba Fett (Jeremy Bulloch) escapes the city with a frozen Han, C-3PO notifies them of pursuing stormtroopers.
While escaping Vader's flagship Executor, R2-D2 begins repairing C-3PO.
Upon making their way to the Rebel's rendezvous point, C-3PO is fully repaired.

=====
Return of the Jedi (1983) =====
In Return of the Jedi, Luke commands C-3PO and R2-D2 to deliver a message to Jabba the Hutt from Luke, who offers 3PO's services as a translator and R2-D2's on Jabba's flying sail barge.
C-3PO's first translation for the crime lord is of the bounty hunter Boushh—Leia in disguise—claiming the bounty for Chewbacca as part of her plan to rescue Han.
Later, Luke infiltrates the palace and kills Jabba's rancor in a duel; whereupon Jabba transfers his court to the sail barge with Luke, Han, and Chewbacca as food for the Sarlacc, while Leia serves as Jabba's slave.
When Luke attempts escape, R2-D2 tosses him his lightsaber, with which he attacks Jabba's guards.
In the midst of the battle, C-3PO is attacked by Jabba's pet Salacious Crumb, who pulls out his right photoreceptor before being driven off by R2-D2.
Thereafter the two escape the sail barge and are retrieved by the protagonists.

C-3PO accompanies the strike force to the Forest Moon of Endor to disable the shield generator protecting the second Death Star.
When he, Han, Luke, Chewbacca, and R2-D2 are captured by the Ewoks, C-3PO is perceived to be a god by the latter.
When the human prisoners are threatened by the Ewoks, Luke uses the Force to levitate the droid above the crowd as demonstration of the supposed god's ability.
Later that night, C-3PO narrates the history of the Rebel Alliance's fight against the Galactic Empire to the tribe, convincing them to help the Rebels at the Battle of Endor.
After the Empire's second Death Star is destroyed, C-3PO joins the protagonists on Endor in celebrating the fall of the Empire.

====
Prequel
trilogy ====
=====
The Phantom Menace (1999) =====
C-3PO returns in Star Wars:
Episode
I –
The Phantom Menace, the first chapter of the Star Wars prequel trilogy, where it was revealed that nine-year-old slave Anakin Skywalker (Jake Lloyd) built him out of spare parts.
C-3PO meets his future partner, R2-D2, along with
Jedi Master Qui-Gon Jinn (Liam Neeson), Queen Padmé Amidala (Natalie Portman) of Naboo, and Gungan Jar Jar Binks (Ahmed Best).
C-3PO and R2-D2 help perfect Anakin's podracer for the Boonta Eve Classic race.

Shortly afterwards, C-3PO becomes part of Anakin's pit crew, where he sees Anakin defeat Sebulba.
C-3PO and Anakin part ways
when Qui-Gon frees the boy after winning a bet with Anakin's master, Watto.
Before parting from C-3PO, Anakin assures the droid that his mother Shmi (Pernilla August) will not sell him.

=====
Attack of the Clones (2002) =====
In Episode II – Attack of the Clones, set 10 years later, Shmi is kidnapped by a group of Tusken Raiders.
Sensing that his mother is in danger, Anakin (now portrayed by Hayden Christensen) travels with Padmé to Tatooine, where they reunite with C-3PO, now with a metallic gray-colored body.
He recognizes Anakin and Padmé and presents them to Anakin's stepfamily, Owen (Joel Edgerton) and Cliegg Lars (Jack Thompson) and Beru Whitesun (Bonnie Piesse).
When Anakin returns with his mother's body, C-3PO attends her funeral.

After Anakin and Padmé's visit to Tatooine, C-3PO accompanies them to the planet Geonosis to rescue Obi-Wan Kenobi (Ewan McGregor) from Sith Lord Count Dooku (Christopher Lee).
Shortly afterward, he follows R2-D2 into a droid-construction site, where his head is temporarily attached to the torso of a battle droid, while the head of the droid is placed onto C-3PO's torso.
Influenced by the battle droid's programming, he reluctantly participates in the film's climactic battle scene, where he is stopped by Jedi Kit Fisto (Silas Carson).
Having been restored by R2-D2, he leaves Geonosis with the other protagonists.
At the end of the film, he is a witness to Padmé and Anakin's marriage on Naboo.

=====
Revenge of the Sith (2005) =====
In Episode III – Revenge of the Sith, C-3PO is aware of Padmé's pregnancy and, in a deleted scene, is present during a secret meeting held with Senators Bail Organa (Jimmy Smits) and Mon Mothma (Genevieve O'Reilly).
After Anakin falls to the dark side of the Force and becomes the Sith Lord Darth Vader, he takes C-3PO and R2-D2 with him as he massacres of the Jedi; C-3PO rationalizes Vader's behavior by saying he has been under a great deal of stress.
C-3PO accompanies Padmé to Mustafar, and witnesses Vader using the Force to choke her into unconsciousness; whereupon C-3PO and
R2-D2 take her to safety.
When Obi-Wan returns to their spaceship following a duel with Vader, C-3PO pilots it to Polis Massa and witnesses Padmé give birth to the Skywalker twins, Luke and Leia, and die shortly afterward.
C-3PO and R2-D2 become Organa's property, and he gives them to Captain Raymus Antilles (Rohan Nichol) to serve aboard the Tantive IV, and orders C-3PO's memory erased in order to protect the Skywalker children from their father and the newly created Galactic Empire.

====
Sequel
trilogy ====
=====
The Force Awakens (2015) =====
Anthony Daniels reprised the role of C-3PO in The Force Awakens, the first installment of the sequel trilogy, which was released on 18 December 2015.
C-3PO is seen with a red left arm, but gets a gold arm at the end of the film.
He has been upgraded to seven million forms of communication.
In the film, he is first seen along with Leia and a Resistance team, picking up Han, the stormtrooper Finn (John Boyega), the droid BB-8, the scavenger Rey (Daisy Ridley), and Chewbacca on the planet Takodana.
During their adventures, C-3PO is reunited with R2-D2, who is reactivated after having been shut off for years.

=====
The Last Jedi (2017) =====
Daniels reprised his role of C-3PO in The Last Jedi, which was released on 15 December 2017.
C-3PO mostly serves as an assistant for Leia and, while she is unconscious, Resistance pilot Poe Dameron (Oscar Isaac); he spends much of the film voicing his concern over the protagonist's chances in missions such as the evacuation of D'Qar at the start of the film and Finn and Rose Tico's (Kelly Marie Tran) mission on the Supremacy later on.
At the end of the film, C-3PO has a brief reunion with Luke, who winks at him before confronting the film's villain, First Order leader Kylo Ren (Adam Driver).

According to Daniels, "In The Last Jedi I became a table decoration, which I regretted, because Threepio was worth more than that."
=====
The Rise of Skywalker (2019) =====
Daniels reprised his role of C-3PO for The Rise of Skywalker.
In part of the film, the character appears with red eyes.
In the film, he accompanies Rey, Finn, Poe, Chewbacca, and BB-8 to Pasaana to meet with Luke's contact, who knows about a Sith artifact; the contact turns out to be Lando.
During the journey, they discover a Sith dagger and try to translate its inscriptions as they hold a clue to the whereabouts of Palpatine's (Ian McDiarmid) fleet, but it is revealed that C-3PO's programming prevents him translating such a language directly.
The heroes manage to find a hacker on the planet Kijimi who can bypass the protocols preventing C-3PO from translating the message, but at the cost of wiping his memories.
Reactivated after he has provided the translation, C-3PO accompanies the group until they return to the Resistance camp, at which point R2-D2 is able to restore his memory from an earlier back-up created just prior to Rey's first mission.
He celebrates the Sith Eternal's defeat with the rest of the Resistance at the end.
===
Anthology films ===
C-3PO makes a brief appearance alongside R2-D2 in Rogue One (2016), accompanying Rebel Alliance troops to Scarif alongside Princess Leia.

===
Other media ===


====
Comics ====
C-3PO appears in Marvel's Star Wars comic series and accompanies Han Solo on a raid on an Imperial outpost in the miniseries Shattered Empire.
The circumstances that caused his left arm to be replaced with a red one is told in Marvel's one-shot Star Wars special, C-3PO: The Phantom Limb.

====
Novels ====
After the events of Return of the Jedi, C-3PO continues to serve Leia Organa in several novels including Bloodline.

In The Truce at Bakura, C-3PO translates Ssi-ruuvi, the language of the Ssi-ruuk, to aid the Alliance.
In The Glove of Darth Vader, C-3PO and R2-D2 are members of the Senate Planetary Intelligence Network (SPIN), and undergo transformation by the Droid Modification Team to be disguised as Kessel droids so that they could infiltrate a gathering of Imperials to find out who is planning to take control of the Empire.
In The Courtship of Princess Leia, C-3PO is led to believe that Han Solo is ancestrally the King of Corellia during Han's competition with Prince Isolder for Leia's hand in marriage.
C-3PO agrees to assist Han as a counselor droid; but is shocked when Han kidnaps Leia and takes her to Dathomir.
Despite this, he continues to present Han in the best possible light and writes a song for him entitled "The Virtues of King Han Solo", which he backs with the sound of a full symphony orchestra.
He later discovers that Han's ancestor was merely "a pretender to the throne", but is present at Han and Leia's wedding.
Following the events of Han and Leia's marriage, C-3PO returns with them to Tatooine in Tatooine Ghost.
There he helps Han and Leia in their search for an Alderaanian moss painting storing a valuable code.
He also reunites with Kitster Banai and Wald, childhood friends of Anakin Skywalker from Episode I. With their help, C-3PO and the others discover Shmi Skywalker's diary, whereof
Leia remarks that the droid described
reminds her of C-3PO.
Due to his memory wipe in Episode III, C-3PO does not mention to Han and Leia his connection to Anakin.
The code is eventually found and destroyed.
In Heir to the Empire, Lando reprograms C-3PO to sound like Leia in order to hide from Imperials on Nkllon; but the Empire, led by Grand Admiral Thrawn, sees through the deception.
In Dark Force Rising, C-3PO goes to Honoghr with Leia during the Thrawn Crisis to discover what had caused the plight of the Noghri.
He is forced to hide with Leia and Chewbacca when Imperial forces arrive overhead, but he later returns with Leia to Coruscant, where she gives birth to Jaina and Jacen Solo.
He serves as caretaker to the twins, and later Anakin Solo as well.
In The Last Command, C-3PO also accompanies Han, Lando, R2-D2, Luke, Chewbacca, and Mara Jade to Wayland on a mission to destroy the Mount Tantiss storehouse.
Thanks to C-3PO and some Noghri, the party recruits aid from the local population and destroys the storehouse.
In Dark Apprentice, the Solo twins escape from Chewbacca's and C-3PO's watch during a trip to a zoo on Coruscant and arrive in the planet's sub-levels.
C-3PO frantically searches for them, but they had been found by King Onibald Daykim and are reunited with their parents.
In Planet of Twilight, C-3PO and R2-D2 accompany Leia on a diplomatic mission to Nam Chorios but are unable to prevent her kidnapping and fail to stop the Death Seed plague unleashed on the crew by Seti Ashgad and Dzym.
Eventually rescued by Han and Lando, the two droids convey their message for help.
In The Crystal Star, C-3PO accompanies Luke and Han to Crseih Station to investigate the possible existence of Jedi trainees; but instead find Waru, a creature from another dimension, from whom they learn of Waru's alliance with Lord Hethrir and of the kidnapping of the Solo children.
Hethrir is destroyed following a confrontation with Leia, Han, and Luke while Waru returns to his dimension.
In The Black Fleet Crisis, C-3PO accompanies Lando, R2-D2, and Lando's associate Lobot to investigate the runaway alien ship Teljkon Vagabond; eventually to discover that the ship contains the last vestiges of the Quella civilization.
In The New Rebellion, C-3PO, along with R2-D2 and a young mechanic named Cole Fardreamer, is instrumental in stopping Kueller from regaining power by disabling the explosive devices he had placed in a large number of droids.
In Ambush at Corellia, during the outbreak of the First Corellian Insurrection, C-3PO and Chewbacca retrieve Jaina, Jacen, and Anakin from the burning Corona House.
In Showdown at Centerpoint, Threepio accompanies Luke, Gaeriel Captison, Belindi Kalenda, and Lando Calrissian to Centerpoint Station, and alerts them to the fact that the temperature inside Hollowtown is increasing to dangerously high levels.
In Vision of the Future, C-3PO participates in Talon Karrde's expedition to the Kathol Sector to find Jorj Car'das, serving as a translator.

====
Legends ====
In April 2014, most of the licensed Star Wars novels and comics produced since the originating 1977 film Star Wars were rebranded by Lucasfilm as Star Wars Legends and declared non-canon to the franchise.
According to the Star Wars comic strip, C-3PO was activated hundreds of years before the events of the original film on the planet Affa.
A Guide to the Star Wars Universe affirms Affa as the droid's planet of origin, narrowing down his activation date to 112 years before A New Hope.
In The Phantom Menace (1999), it is revealed that C-3PO was built by a young Anakin Skywalker.
In the non-canon Star Wars Tales story "Thank the Maker", Vader remembers finding the defunct droid in Watto's junk heap and guessing it is several decades old.
In Star Wars media involving the Clone Wars, C-3PO serves as Padmé Amidala's personal protocol droid.
In "The New Face of War", a story in Star Wars: Republic, Queen Jamillia appoints the droid to serve as liaison to the Jedi during that campaign following the defense of Naboo and the bio-plague of Ohma-D'un by the Separatists.
He is a reluctant participant in many of Padmé's adventures, including a hazardous mission during the Battle of Ilum, in which his loyalty is essential in helping Jedi Master Yoda rescue fellow Jedi Luminara Unduli and Barriss Offee.
In Expanded Universe material set after Return of the Jedi, C-3PO assists Leia, Luke, and their allies in the Alliance (and later, the New Republic) on many missions.
Due to his function as a protocol droid, he most often stays with Leia Organa-Solo on Coruscant, assisting her political duties, while R2-D2 often stays with Luke at the Jedi Academy.

=====
Animated series =====
During the Droids series, set between Revenge of the Sith and A New Hope, C-3PO and R2-D2 are traded to various masters.

In Clone Wars, C-3PO's outer plating are upgraded to a shiny bronzium coating due to his tenure as Padmé's servant.
He also disapproves of combat droids, once demanding to "have a serious talk with their programmer".

=====
Comics =====
In 1994, Dark Horse Comics, in its self-titled compilation series, serialized a story titled Droids, which led into a 14-issue comic series continuing the adventures of C-3PO and R2-D2 before the events of A New Hope.
Lucasfilm did not require these to tie into the animated series of the same name.
Anthony Daniels and Ryder Windham also co-wrote a one-shot comic titled The Protocol Offensive (1997), based on a story by Brian Daley and with art by Igor Kordey.
In Empire's End, C-3PO and R2-D2 are nearly destroyed after they spot an Imperial installing a homing beacon on the Millennium Falcon; but are saved by Han Solo and Chewbacca.
The resurrected Palpatine and his fleet discover the Alliance's existence, leading C-3PO and the others to flee to Iziz, a city on the planet of Onderon.
Palpatine eventually finds them, but is mortally wounded by Han and destroyed when Empatojayos Brand sacrifices himself to save the latter's son Anakin.
In the non-canon Star Wars Tales story Storyteller, C-3PO is found partially destroyed and abandoned, years after the events of the original trilogy, by two slave boys.
He tells them stories of Luke Skywalker's adventures, and they imagine the stories played out by members of their own alien race.
As he is finishing his tale, a Vindar slavedriver appears, blasts C-3PO's head off, and kills Otalp.
After the Vindar leave the cave, Remoh finds a lightsaber in the remains of C-3PO's body and in so doing, finds hope for his people's freedom.

=====
Television =====
The US Department of Health and Human Services sponsored an approximately 1 minute long anti smoking television public service announcement.
In the PSA, C3PO finds R2D2 holding a cigarette, and warns R2D2 of the dangerous nature of smoking.

==
Behind the scenes ==
Anthony Daniels did not initially agree to be cast as C-3PO, but changed his mind after reading the character's part in the script and seeing a concept painting by Ralph McQuarrie, who based his early design largely on Walter Schulze-Mittendorff's Maschinenmensch from the Fritz Lang film Metropolis (1927).
The initial costume had to be roughened so it would not reflect too much light.
Daniels tried on the full costume for the first time the day before shooting began, and did not see its final appearance until being shown a Polaroid photograph of it while he wore the suit.
George Lucas originally envisioned the character as "more of a con man" with an American accent, but changed his mind after Daniels' voice performance outshone that of 30 other actors that tested for the role.
Mel Blanc was considered for the role, but according to Daniels, Blanc told Lucas that Daniels was better for the part.
C-3PO has been played by Daniels in 11 Star Wars films—ten live action (every episode of the "Skywalker Saga" and one Anthology film) and one animated.
In The Phantom Menace, a skeletal C-3PO model was puppeteered by Michael Lynch (who was also a chief model maker for all three prequel films), with Daniels providing the voice, and Lynch was removed in post-production.
Daniels attempted to puppeteer the skeletal droid for Episode II, but experienced difficulties; the puppet was replaced in favor of a fully plated C-3PO.
A filmed scene featured Padmé outfitting C-3PO with his plating, but it was cut to improve the pacing.
From Attack of the Clones to The Rise of Skywalker, as well as Rogue One, Daniels both wore the costume and provided the voice.
Daniels also played C-3PO in the live-action segments of Star Wars Holiday Special (1978), and voiced the character in the animated portion.
Daniels appeared as C-3PO at the 50th Academy Awards in 1978 and 88th Academy Awards in 2016.
He also voiced C-3PO in the radio drama adaptations of the original trilogy and five Star Wars animated series: Droids (1985–86), Clone Wars (2003–05),
The Clone Wars (2008–14), Rebels (2014–18) and Resistance (2018–20).
He reprised his role in The Lego Movie, in which C-3PO has a cameo appearance with crew members of the Millennium Falcon, and in the Star Wars Forces of Destiny episode "Beasts of Echo Base", in which his voice can be heard on Leia's comlink.
Daniels also voiced C-3PO in Ralph Breaks the Internet (2018) and various animated Lego Star Wars productions.
Star Wars Galaxy of Adventures features some of C-3PO's dialogue from the Skywalker Saga.

Daniels reprised his role of C-3PO for the Disneyland ride Star Tours, co-created by George Lucas in 1987.
He was videotaped while recording the dialogue, with the tape serving as a reference for the Imagineers to program an audio-animatronic C-3PO in the queue area.
Both it and the audio-animatronic R2-D2 are the original props used in filming.
Daniels also donned the costume for certain video segments played before and after the simulator ride itself, also portraying an electronically disguised Ewok announcer.
Daniels also appeared in the C-3PO costume for various promotional materials for Star Tours, including the electronic press kit, a Disney special on Star Tours hosted by Gil Gerard, and various opening day skits.
When Star Tours opened a bilingual version at Disneyland Paris, Daniels re-recorded C-3PO's dialogue in French.
C-3PO ends up in the pilot's seat of the Starspeeder 1000 in the attraction's successor, Star Tours –
The Adventures Continue, in which he is also played by Daniels.
Daniels made several appearances as C-3PO on numerous TV shows and commercials, notably on a Star Wars-themed episode of The Donny and Marie Show in 1977, Disneyland's 35th Anniversary and a Star Wars-themed episode of The Muppet Show in 1980.
Along with R2-D2, he also has a role as the character on Sesame Street episodes 1364 and 1396.
They also hosted several documentaries including The Making of Star Wars and Star Wars: Connections.
In 1977, a photograph appeared on a Topps Star Wars trading card in which C-3PO appeared to have a prominent phallus.
It was later withdrawn from circulation.
In 2007, the official Star Wars website hypothesized that this was caused by a part of the suit that had fallen into place just as the photograph was taken.
However, in 2019 Daniels clarified that the costume had become compromised during C-3PO's oil bath in A New Hope; the warm liquid had caused the costume to separate, leading to "an over-exposure of plastic in that region".
He further speculated in his 2019 autobiography that an artist had painted in the extended appendage.

==
Cultural influence ==
In 2012, the United States Navy built a robot called the Autonomous Shipboard Humanoid which they claim was modeled on C-3PO.
The robot was built for the purpose of extinguishing fires, but has similar movement abilities to the Star Wars droid by being able to climb ladders and carry hoses.
Also similar to C-3PO, it can respond to human gestures, but at a much more basic level, unlike the Star Wars droid.
One of NASA programs to collaborate with the private sector in the development of commercial space transportation it's named 'C3PO', acronym for Commercial Crew & Cargo Program Office.
Nicolas Ghesquière, creative director of Louis Vuitton, and Rodarte have created fashion designs inspired by C-3PO.

The cover photo of the August 2015 issue of GQ featured comedian Amy Schumer wearing a replica of Princess Leia's bikini and sucking one of C-3PO's fingers.
Lucasfilm and Disney objected to this image and tweeted a public statement that it was unauthorized.
In the Italian version of the original trilogy, C-3PO was named "D-3BO".
Anglicisms were not common in the Italian language during the 1970s and 1980s, and the names of various characters were changed to be easier to pronounce and recognize for Italian speakers.
Some of these changes were reverted in the dubbing of the prequel and sequel trilogies, where the original name C-3PO was used instead.
Other name changes in the Italian version of the original trilogy include R2-D2, Han Solo, Leia Organa and Darth Vader, who were called respectively "C1-P8", "Ian Solo", "Leila Organa" and "Dart Fener" (or "Lord Fener").

==
See also ==
R2-D2
BB-8


== Notes ==
Daniels, Anthony (2019).
I Am C-3PO: The Inside Story.
DK.
ISBN 9781465492562.

Herzfeld, Noreen L. (2002).
In our image: artificial intelligence and the human spirit.
Fortress Press.
ISBN 978-0-8006-3476-6.
Retrieved 4 February 2011.

==
References ==
Footnotes
Citations


==
External links ==
C-3PO in the StarWars.com Databank
https://starwars.fandom.com/wiki/C-3PO
C-3PO on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
The Sith are the main antagonists of many works in the fictional universe of the Star Wars franchise.
The Sith Order are depicted as an ancient monastic and kraterocratic cultist organization of supernaturally gifted Force-wielders driven by a machiavellian-imperialist agenda of galactic domination and revenge against their arch-rivals, the Jedi Order.

Sith are ruthless and totalitarian by design, in which a supreme autocratic authority is concentrated in a single individual granted the honorific Dark Lord of the Sith.
Sith culture is of perpetual self-destruction and reinvention; transfer of power is conducted through state-sanctioned assassinations: when a Sith Lord grows complacent, begins to show weakness, and is eventually killed, their property and authority are transferred to the apprentice who killed them.
Robberies, betrayal, and sabotage are commonplace; murder is acceptable so long as the culprit is not caught.
Sith teach their apprentices to revere the dark side of the Force and to believe that the galaxy was theirs to rule by cosmic right.
This kraterocratic system ensures that Sith society nurtures some of the most vicious and competitive individuals in the galaxy and is only governed by those strong enough to seize control.

==
Etymology ==
The word Sith was first used in the 1974 rough draft of Star Wars with the first published use being the 1976 novelization of Star Wars as a title for the key villain Darth Vader, the "Dark Lord of the Sith".
Sith characters had also been portrayed as such in some Star Wars Legends works prior to the release of The Phantom Menace, and in archived footage for the original Star Wars.

The term "Dark Jedi" was sometimes used for characters who would be later identified as Sith, or had goals and practices similar to the Sith.
In his novel series The Thrawn Trilogy, author Timothy Zahn labeled Sith Lord Darth Vader and Emperor Palpatine as "Dark Jedi", and the term "Sith" was never mentioned in the series until later reprints of the novels.
"
Dark Jedi" is also the name given in the Star Wars universe to antihero fictional characters attuned to the Force and adept in its dark side.
However, the concept of "Dark Jedi" is not referenced anywhere in any of the theatrical Star Wars films, and they exist by that name only in non-canonical Star Wars Legends media, including video games such as Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic and the Star Wars: Jedi Knight series.
The Sith were not mentioned by name in canonical movies until the prequel trilogy used the word on film starting with 1999's The Phantom Menace.

===
Influences ===
George Lucas acknowledged that the Jedi, Sith, and other Force concepts have been inspired by many sources.
These include: knighthood, chivalry, paladinism, samurai bushido, Shaolin Monastery, Feudalism, Hinduism, Qigong, Greek philosophy and mythology, Roman history and mythology, parts of the Abrahamic religions, Confucianism, Shintō, Buddhism and Taoism, and numerous cinematic precursors.
The works of philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche and mythologist Joseph Campbell, especially his book The Hero with a Thousand Faces (1949), directly influenced Lucas, and was what drove him to create the 'modern myth' of Star Wars.

In particular, the contrasting narrative relationship between the dark side-using Sith and light side-using Jedi mirrors several modern and classical literary tropes.

Most prominently, the conflict between the Sith and Jedi employs the classic trope of black and white moral dualism—an elemental contrast between evil (the "darkness") and good (the "light") first postulated and elaborated in Zoroastrianism, from which the core mythos of Star Wars is much influenced.

The ongoing struggle of the humanistic "light side"-affiliated Jedi to permanently defeat the egoistic "dark side"-affiliated Sith is framed not only as a contest of values, but as a deep metaphysical conflict: The dark side of the Force is viewed by the Jedi, and generally represented within Star Wars media, as not only a dangerous expedient but as a form of existential corruption which must be purged for the universe, or a person, to attain spiritual balance.

Jedi are often depicted as imperfect individuals, but their cause of selfless heroism is ultimately on the right side of an inexorable cosmic struggle against evil, embodied in the power-hungry Sith and the dark side of the Force.

The dualistic relationship between the Sith' and the Jedi' concepts of "purity" mirrors the philosophical and literary concept of "Apollonian and Dionysian": the Jedi are portrayed as embracing purity, reason, temperance, altruism and other humanistic virtues; the Sith, by contrast, embrace curiosity, emotion, conflict, power, instincts, unfettered self-interest and other hedonistic vices.
However, whereas the classic Greek concept did not necessarily view the Apollonian and Dyonisian principles as opposed, Star Wars frames the Jedi and Sith as opponents in a dire moral struggle, with the Sith cast as corrupted villains apparently destined to defeat or self-destruction in the end.

Although a path to temporary power, the Sith way inevitably leads to ruin.

Within the Star Wars narrative, the Jedi and Sith naturally have different self-understandings.
In Sith rhetoric, the relationship between the philosophies of the Jedi and Sith closely mirrors Nietzsche's concept of master–slave morality.
Sith value "master" virtues, such as pride and power, whereas the Jedi value altruistic virtues like kindness and empathy.
The goal of the Sith is tangible greatness: the ability to shape and destroy the world according to one's will alone.
The goal of the Jedi is moral goodness: freedom from inner, and outer, turmoil and suffering.
However, the Sith consider the Jedi's aspirations to be either hopeless or pathetic.
To the Sith, greater power is the only authentic goal.

==
Development ==
Originally, George Lucas conceived the Sith as a group that served the Emperor in the same way that the Schutzstaffel had served Adolf Hitler.
In developing the history for The Empire Strikes
Back, Lucas condensed this into one character in the form of Darth Vader.

===
Fictional backstory ===


====
Sith Ideology ====
Sith philosophy lionized conflict as a catalyst for growth and as a tool for purging the weak, disloyal, undisciplined and unworthy.
Sith academies were structured with rules, lectures, and classes, with an underlying "kill or be killed" mentality amongst the apprentices.
Sith emphasize "survival of the fittest" and view restraint as a weakness.
Members adhere to master morality, are characterized by the desire to seize power by any means necessary, leveraging force (both physical and supernatural), social maneuvering, and political cunning to their advantage.
The Sith cultivate a connection to the dark side of the Force, which provides them with easy access to superhuman power and arcane knowledge; however, the trade-off is the severe cost of adopting a dark triad personality that corrodes their basic capacity for empathy, kindness, and love.

Throughout Star Wars media and in popular culture, the Sith are infamous as the dualistic antagonists to the Jedi, an affiliation of altruistic warriors who strive to use their own martial training and connection to the "light side" of the Force to promote peace and the common welfare throughout the galaxy.
The Sith have a philosophical framework that "justifies" their ruthless and self-serving actions, but their agenda are considered appalling by society in general, and the Jedi who actively oppose them.
To counteract the Jedi's benevolent influence, the Sith were responsible for secretly instigating many small regional conflicts as part of their larger plan to destabilize the Republic and eventually take control of the galaxy.
Hiding in the shadows, their fingerprints are everywhere, in every conflict in the galaxy, and their subversive influence reaches far and wide.

Over their long storied history, the Sith have established great empires, come close to realizing their ambitions of galactic conquest, and nearly eradicated the Jedi.
Ultimately, however, they are self-defeating, their grand plans undone time and again by internal strife, rebellion inspired by their vicious tactics, and the psychologically noxious effects of their dark arts and philosophy.

====
The Dark Side of the Force ====
The Sith are dedicated to the "Sith Code" and to mastering the dark side of the Force.
The Sith Code identifies conflict as the fundamental dynamic of reality, and holds that the search for lasting peace, within or without, is both quixotic and misguided.
Rather, Sith embrace strife and dark passion as salutary and emancipatory forces, as they believe that violent struggle purges the decadent and weak, and that emotions such as aggression and hate provide the strength and resolve to secure freedom through victory.
Although Sith seek dominion, Sith philosophy stresses that power belongs only to those with the strength, cunning, and ruthlessness to maintain it, and thus "betrayal" among the Sith is not a vice but an endorsed norm.
Accordingly, the Sith reject altruism, self-abnegation and kindness, as they regard such attitudes as founded on delusions that fetter one's perceptions and power.
In connection with their philosophy, the Sith draw on the dark side of the Force through severe negative emotions, a technique antipodal to that of their archenemies, the Jedi, who rely on the Force's "light side," i.e., the Force as experienced through disciplined states of quietude and compassion.
Notably, both the Jedi and Sith shun romantic and familial love, as the Jedi fear such love will lead to attachment, and thus selfishness, and the Sith fear it will compromise their ruthlessness and connection to the dark side of the Force.

Although the Sith are intimately linked to the dark side, not every user of the dark side is a Sith, nor is every user of the light side a Jedi.

Yes, a Jedi’s strength flows from the Force.
But beware of the dark side.
Anger, fear, aggression; the dark side of the Force are they.
Easily they flow, quick to join you in a fight.
If once you start down the dark path, forever will it dominate your destiny, consume you
it will, as it did Obi-Wan’s apprentice.

The dark side of the Force is stigmatized as seductive, corruptive, and addictive by the Jedi, who view it as evil, whereas the Sith consider the dark side of the Force to be its most powerful manifestation, and regard the abstemious Jedi as blinded by false virtue.
As portrayed in all Star Wars-related media, the dark side provides users with powers similar to those of the light side-using Jedi, but as it leverages passion and violence, its use is enhanced by negative raw and aggressive emotions and instinctual feelings such as anger, greed, hatred, and rage.
By deciding to learn the ways of the dark side of the Force, the Sith may also acquire powers and abilities considered by some in the Star Wars universe to be unnatural.
A notable example is a form of directed dielectric breakdown called "Force lightning," infamously used by the Sith Lord Darth Sidious to torture Jedi-initiate and rebel Luke Skywalker.
Darth Sidious claimed that his own master, Darth Plagueis, could even use the Force to avert the natural deaths of those whose lives he wished to save.
Being uninhibited in their use of the Force, Sith could also repurpose abilities shared with the Jedi, such as telekinesis, to new and terrifying effect: Darth Vader was infamous for his use of telekinetic strangulation, or "Force choke," as a means of execution or intimidation.
Kylo Ren was able to stop blaster bolts mid-air with the Force and also used it to activate lightsabers remotely to kill enemies.

Beneath anger is always fear.
Fear is the path to the dark side.
Fear leads to anger, anger leads to hate, hate leads to suffering.
I sense much fear in you.
Train yourself to let go of everything you fear to lose.

Extended indulgence in the dark side reshapes the user's psychology, resulting in a loss of humanity, morality, empathy, and the ability to love, leaving every Sith, to varying degrees, amoral, cruel, sadistic and violent.
Considering this dark change in personality to be a transformation into a different person altogether, some who turn to the dark side take on a different name, as they regard their former persona as dead and destroyed.
Sith Lords, in particular, adopt a new name upon their initiation into the Order, prefixing it with the title Darth (e.g., "Darth Vader").
Severe saturation in the dark side may even lead to physical degradation.
Although Sith are deeply affected by the Machiavellian methods and dark arts they practice, they are not portrayed as necessarily irredeemable:
Some Sith, most famously Darth Vader in the final moments of his life, have renounced the Order and the dark side of the Force, as has Kylo Ren.

The dark side is generous...
It is patient and it always wins – but in the heart of its strength lies its weakness: one lone candle is enough to hold it back.

Martial arts are a core part of the Sith tradition, and Sith featured in the Star Wars film series have all been highly trained warriors who further augment their abilities with the Force.
Like the Jedi, the Sith's signature armament is an extremely lethal focused energy melee weapon known as a lightsaber, which (generally) only those trained in the ways of the Force can use effectively, although General Grievous, a non-Force user, was able to murder numerous Jedi and seize their lightsabers as weapons..
Sith use lightsabers in combination with Force-derived powers, such as telekinesis, enhanced dexterity and precognition, to achieve superhuman combat prowess.
A fully trained Sith is depicted as being at least a match for a well-trained Jedi Knight, and either can handily defeat multiple ordinary attackers armed with projectile weapons.
In matters of dress, Sith may adopt any attire consistent with their plans or guise; they commonly favor black robes, armor and gis when presenting themselves authentically.

===
Fictional backstory (Legends) ===
In the Legends continuity, the Sith Order began around 6,900 BBY, during a period known as the Hundred Year Darkness.
A series of conflicts began between the rebellious dark Jedi, a faction of the Jedi Order, and the rest of the Order.
The dark Jedi were defeated and cast out, exiled to the unknown regions.
These Exiles came across the planet Korriban, and its native species, the Sith.
The strongest among the Exiles, Ajunta Pall, became the first to hold the title Dark Lord of the Sith.
His contemporaries, such as Karness Muur and XoXaan became Sith Lords.
The human Dark Jedi interbred with the Sith species, who also had an affinity for the Dark Side.
They would become the original Sith Empire.

One of the earliest leaders of this Sith Empire was Tulak Hord.
He expanded the Sith territories and conquered the Dromund System, home to Dromuund Kaas, later the capital of the Sith Empire.
He was eventually followed by Marka Ragnos, the last ruler of a period known as the Golden Age of the Sith.
Upon the passing of Ragnos, two contenders for the throne of Dark Lord, Naga Sadow and Ludo Kressh, dueled at his funeral.
Eventually, after a series of conflicts, Sadow was victorious, and Kressh apparently killed.

Sadow began the Great Hyperspace War, invading the Republic and laying siege to its planets.
Sadow's efforts were initially met with success, his forces amplified by illusions that Sadow projected from his meditation sphere.
Unfortunately, the Dark Lord's concentration was broken when his apprentice turned on him.
With his illusions dispersed, Sadow's forces were forced to retreat.
Upon returning to Sith space, they found that Kressh had not been killed, and engaged him in a space battle.
Sadow was victorious again, but they were soon attacked by Republic forces.
Sadow escaped by causing the Denarii Binary Star to go supernova.

The Sith Empire would eventually rise again, with the rise of Exar Kun and Ulic Qel-Droma.
The spirit of the deceased Dark Lord, Marka Ragnos, declared Kun Dark Lord of the Sith, and made Qel-Droma his apprentice.
Allying themselves with warriors such as the Mandalorians, Kun and Qel-Droma declared war on the Galactic Republic.
During a raid on the Jedi Library at Ossus, Qel-Droma dueled and killed his brother, but was captured.
Qel-Droma was redeemed and was instrumental in Kun's downfall, when the latter retreated to Yavin 4.

At some point following the Mandalorian Wars, the individuals known as Revan and Alek declared themselves Sith Lords, and became Darth Revan and Darth Malak respectively.
Their brutal campaign against the Republic was hugely successful.
Revan was eventually betrayed by Malak, allowing a Jedi strike team to capture him.
Malak continued his conquest without Revan's tactical leadership until a redeemed Revan defeated him, and the Star Forge, the source of the Sith Fleet was destroyed.

Remnants of Revan's Sith Empire, led by the Sith Triumvirate, consisting of Darth Traya, Darth Nihilus, and Darth Sion, began a shadow war against the Jedi.
This First Jedi Purge, brought the Jedi Order to the brink of extinction.
Their downfall came about when Meetra Surik, a Jedi who was exiled after the Mandalorian Wars, returned to known space.
She defeated the three Sith, and without the Sith leadership, and the destruction of their base of operations on Malachor V, the remaining Sith forces faded into obscurity.

Around 300 years later, the original Sith Empire, now under the leadership of Emperor Vitiate, emerged from the Unknown Regions and declared war on the republic.
This war, dubbed the Great Galactic War, was halted when Vitiate, on the cusp of victory, was restrained by the telepathic prowess of Revan.
After a period of non-fighting, called the Galactic Cold War, tensions boiled over, and the Galactic War began.
The Sith empire eventually fell to infighting and mostly disappeared.
Occasionally, a Dark Lord such as Darth Rivan or Darth Ruin, would rise and fall, but the Sith did not become a major threat again until around 2,500 years later.

At this point, the Brotherhood of Darkness arose, led by the Sith Lord Skere Kaan.
They focused on controlling the infighting between the Sith.
This policy allowed them to make great progress in their war against the Republic.
Ironically, one of their own, a Sith Lord by the name of Bane turned on them, because he disapproved of their methods.
He manipulated the Brotherhood into extinction, and they were defeated.
Bane started the Rule of Two, which evolved into the Sith as they are seen in the films.

===
Fictional history ===
The Star Wars saga began with the film Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope, which was released in 1977.
Since then, films, books, computer games and comics have been released, all set in the fictional universe of Star Wars, which has expanded the history of the Sith within their stories.

The schemes of the Sith are key to the overarching plot of the Star Wars films and much other fictional material in the franchise.
Their background has varied among depictions, but the Sith have always been insidious archenemies of the Jedi leveraging dark arts in pursuit of power and revenge.
The Sith were first mentioned in A New Hope in a scene ultimately cut from the film.
They were expanded upon heavily in the following years in books, comics, games and other multimedia.
The Sith were formally introduced on-screen with the release of Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace in 1999 as a shadowy martial order manipulating the movie's political factions into a galaxy-spanning civil war.

Star Wars:
The Clone Wars first aired on Cartoon Network in 2008.
This series took place between Episode II: Attack of the Clones and Episode III: Revenge of the Sith.
During this time, Anakin Skywalker is a full-fledged Jedi Knight and the series shows how he progresses into his fall to the Dark Side of the Force.
Count Dooku is the active Sith Lord and leader of the Separatist Alliance.
The series also explores Dooku's attempts at training secret apprentices like Asajj Ventress and Savage Opress in order to eventually defeat Darth Sidious and become the ruling Sith Lord.

====
Emergence of the Sith Order ====
The origin, agenda, abilities and philosophy of the Sith are intertwined with their relationship to the Force.
With proper training, the Force may be called upon by rare individuals capable of "sensing" or "touching" it to achieve extraordinary feats such as telekinesis, precognition and mental suggestion.
Not all psychological states are conducive to employing the Force; discipline is required.
However, both quietude and focused, intense passion alike can be effective.
The Sith originated in a species of Force-sensitive warriors who discovered the efficacy of passion as a tool to draw on the Force at least 5,000 years prior to the events of the first Star Wars film.
Fully embracing this approach, they became defined and corrupted by it.

The warriors who would become the first Sith were apparently heterodox members of an older martial order of Force-sensitive sapient beings in the Star Wars universe: The Jedi.
The Jedi served as a space-faring knightly order within the Galactic Republic, a representative democracy encompassing most developed worlds.
The Jedi Order sought to use the powers of the Force to help defend the weak and advance the rule of law across the galaxy, in keeping with their ethics of self-sacrifice and service to the common welfare.
The Jedi creed mirrored their method of utilizing the Force, and Jedi doctrine favored states of serenity, detachment, compassion, and humility as the proper means of accessing its power.
When members of the Jedi Order began to experiment with passion as an alternative, controversy emerged.
The Jedi establishment saw these innovations as a threat to the ethos of the Jedi, opening members to the seduction of aggrandizement and cruelty.
Eventually, this controversy led to a sectarian conflict in which the heterodox Jedi were defeated and exiled.
In exile, the dissident Jedi were free to explore the relationship between passion and the Force.
They concluded that the martial and ethical disciplines of the Jedi establishment were foolish and misguided: Passion, not quietude, was the most potent means of accessing the Force, and conflict, not peace, was the natural and healthy state of the universe.
Rejecting the self-abnegation of their forebears, the exiles now embraced ruthless personal ambition, believing that power belonged to those with the cunning and strength to seize it.
In their training, the dissidents would seek to master the Force by cultivating dark passions such as anger and hate, a practice anathematized by the Jedi as taking recourse to the Force's "Dark Side."
Guided by their kratocratic and egoistic philosophy and armed with taboo Dark Side techniques, the former Jedi exiles would reemerge to menace the galaxy as the Sith Order, aiming to conquer the Galactic Republic and exact revenge against the Jedi.

A succession of Sith-led regimes would arise to challenge the Jedi and the Galactic Republic.
However, internal power struggles would prove decisive in thwarting the Sith's designs.
The paradox of reconciling endless personal ambition with corporate action would become a great practical and philosophical concern for the Sith.
Ultimately, this paradox would be “resolved” through a drastic reorganization effected by a leader named Darth Bane, who recast the Sith in an esoteric lineal master-apprentice tradition known as “The Rule of Two.”
Thereafter (at least, as a matter of orthodoxy) there would be only two Sith at a time:
One to embody power, and another to crave it.
While concealing their identity as Sith, a succession of Sith masters and apprentices would work through the centuries to inveigle or force themselves into positions of power and undermine responsible government, preparing the Galactic Republic for eventual usurpation.
The Banite tradition encouraged each apprentice to eventually challenge and slaughter his or her master, and take an apprentice in turn.
In this way, Darth Bane guaranteed the conspiracy remained a secret for a thousand years; he believed that the kratocratic essence of Sith philosophy could be reconciled with a sustained project of galactic domination and revenge against the Jedi.
The first six Star Wars films chronicle the consummation, and eventual undoing, of this ancient scheme.

====
Ascent to power of the Sith ====
Darth Bane's plan would come to fruition through Sheev Palpatine, a Naboo Senator, later Supreme Chancellor, of the Galactic Republic, and secretly a Dark Lord of the Sith (“Darth Sidious”).
By manipulating disgruntled factions within the Galactic Republic, Palpatine orchestrated civil war.
This conflict, known within the Star Wars universe as the "Clone Wars", provided a justification for consolidating power in the Galactic Republic's chief executive and assembling a large army of hastily cloned soldiers—surreptitiously conditioned to obey certain key commands issued by Palpatine.
Although the Jedi eventually discovered Palpatine's identity as a Sith and attempted to arrest him, this action was anticipated by Palpatine, who framed their actions as an attempted coup, providing in turn a pretext for annihilating the Jedi by activating “Order 66,” one of the clone soldiers’ embedded protocols.
In the course of effecting his designs, Palpatine also manipulated the Jedi's most powerful initiate, Anakin Skywalker, into his service, by promising to teach Skywalker dark side techniques that could save the life of Padmé Amidala, a Galactic Senator to whom Skywalker was secretly married in violation of Jedi rules, and whose death in childbirth Skywalker had preternaturally foreseen.
In a tragic irony, Amidala's sheer horror at discovering Skywalker's collaboration with Sidious in destroying the Jedi would itself be the cause of her death during childbirth, though Sidious would trick Skywalker into believing that an episode of Skywalker's physical abuse of Amidala had been the actual cause of her death.
Skywalker's subsequent emotional collapse would lead him to fully embrace the dark side of the Force and assume the persona of Darth Vader, Lord of the Sith.
With Darth Vader at his side, the Emperor would rule the newly styled Galactic Empire for approximately 20 years as its Emperor.
Initially unknown to Vader and Sidious, two children were delivered by Padme before her death.

====
Sith temples ====
The Rebels episode "Twilight of the Apprentice" features a forbidden planet called Malachor, home of an ancient Sith temple.
The temple contains a superweapon, and can only be activated by placing a special Sith Holocron in an obelisk at the summit of the pyramid inside the temple.
Thousands of years prior, a battle was waged on Malachor that resulted in the deaths of its inhabitants.
Somewhere between the events of his last appearance in Solo:
A Star Wars Story and this Rebels episode
, Darth Maul had become stranded on the planet.
When Ahsoka Tano, Kanan Jarrus and Ezra Bridger arrive, Ezra is separated from them.
He is discovered by Maul, and together, they use the Force cooperatively to solve a series of tests, and retrieve a Sith Holocron.
With the help of Kanan and Ahsoka, they fought three Inquisitors, all of whom are killed by Maul.
Maul then betrays his allies, blinding Kanan, and proceeds to activate the superweapon.

Maul is defeated by a sightless Kanan, and Darth Vader arrives with the intention of retrieving the holocron, but is challenged by Ahsoka, his former Padawan.
While the superweapon is preparing to fire, Kanan and Ezra retrieve the holocron and escape, preventing the weapon of mass destruction from being used.
Even though the temple is destabilized, Ahsoka and Vader keep fighting to the death within the rapidly crumbling building, until it eventually explodes, wounding Vader.
The Star Wars Resistance episode "The Relic Raiders" depicts a Sith temple hidden underneath a later Jedi temple.

====
End of the Sith ====
Anakin's children, Leia, and Luke Skywalker would become key members of the Rebel Alliance to restore the Galactic Republic.
Luke would be secretly tutored in the ways of the Force by Vader's own former Jedi master, Obi-Wan Kenobi, and a powerful elder Jedi, Yoda, who also survived Palpatine's purge.
Ironically, during a final confrontation between Luke Skywalker, Darth Vader and the Emperor aboard a mobile battle station known as the Death Star, the Sith lineage would end as Darth Bane prescribed that it proceed.
Darth Sidious offered Skywalker an ultimatum to enter his service or die, and proceeded to use his Force-derived powers to torture and kill Skywalker when the latter refused to embrace the dark side of the Force.
Experiencing a crisis of conscience at the imminent death of Skywalker, whom Vader now knew to be his son, Darth Vader chose to intervene and kill his former master, Sidious, fulfilling the prophecy of the Chosen One.
Vader would die of his own injuries shortly thereafter, thus apparently bringing an end to the Sith and their ancient vendetta.

The 2019 film
The Rise of Skywalker depicts the climax of the conflict between the Sith and the Jedi, and features the group known as the Sith Eternal, led by a resurrected Darth Sidious.
When Sidious meets his final demise at the hands of his granddaughter, Rey, the moment also marks the definitive end of the Sith.

==
Overview ==


===
Timeline of members ===
Before the films - At an unknown point in time, numerous Jedi become disillusioned with the Order and exile themselves, forming the Sith Order.
Thousands of years later, a centuries-long war between the Jedi and the Sith takes place, which culminates with the apparent defeat of all the Sith.
The sole survivor, Darth Bane, takes an apprentice and goes on to create the Rule of Two, allowing the Sith to continue existing in secret for almost a millennium.
Almost 1000 years after Bane's death, Darth Plagueis trains Sidious, who ultimately kills Plagueis in his sleep and takes Darth Maul as his first apprentice.

Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace - Sidious and Maul.
The latter is seemingly killed by Obi-Wan Kenobi.

Star Wars:
Episode II – Attack of the Clones - Sidious and Darth Tyranus.
Maul lives, but is still presumed dead and does not appear in the film.

Star Wars: The Clone Wars film and series - Sidious, Tyranus, and Maul.
Tyranus also takes Asajj Ventress as an informal apprentice, before replacing her with Savage Opress.
Opress later betrays Tyranus and becomes the apprentice of his brother Maul, who now operates on his own as a crime lord.
Ventress gives up her Sith ways and becomes a bounty hunter, but gets killed by Tyrannus.
Opress also gets killed by Sidious.

Star Wars:
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith - Sidious and Tyranus.
The latter is killed and replaced by Anakin Skywalker, who becomes Darth Vader.
Maul also lives, but does not appear in the film.

Solo:
A Star Wars Story - Maul.
Sidious and Vader also live, but do not appear.

Star Wars Rebels - Sidious, Vader, and Maul.
The latter no longer sees himself as a Sith and lives in exile; he is later killed in a duel with  his long-time rival, Obi-Wan Kenobi.
The Inquisitors are trained by Vader as Jedi hunters, but none are official Sith; the Grand Inquisitor, the Fifth Brother, the Seventh Sister, and the Eight Brother Inquisitors are all ultimately killed.

Rogue One and Star Wars:
Episode IV – A New Hope - Vader.
Sidious lives, and is only mentioned as "The Emperor".

Star Wars:
Episode V –
The Empire Strikes Back - Sidious and Vader.

Star Wars: Episode VI – Return of the Jedi - Sidious and Vader.
The latter gets redeemed by his son, Luke Skywalker, and dies while killing Sidious (who secretly survives by transferring his spirit into a clone body).

Star Wars:
Episode VII –
The Force Awakens - Snoke, Kylo Ren, and the Knights of Ren, although none are official Sith.
Sidious also lives, but does not appear in the film.

Star Wars:
Episode VIII –
The Last Jedi - Snoke and Kylo Ren.
The former gets killed by Ren.
Sidious and the Knights of Ren also live, but do not appear.

Star Wars:
Episode IX –
The Rise of Skywalker - Sidious, Kylo Ren, and the Knights of Ren.
Sidious gets finally killed by Rey, Ren redeems himself and dies to save Rey, and the Knights of Ren get killed by the redeemed Ben Solo.
===
Members ===


====
In film ====


=====
Darth Sidious =====
Darth Sidious (Sheev Palpatine) was a male human Dark Lord of the Sith who appeared in each trilogy of the Skywalker Saga.
Originally the eldest son of an aristocratic family from the planet Naboo, he rose to power within the Galactic Republic's government system starting from Senator of his homeworld, then to Supreme Chancellor of the Republic, and finally to self-proclaimed Emperor of the Galactic Empire.
This was done by cultivating a public image as a humble and competent politician while secretly mastering dark Sith arts studying under Plagueis, and planning the destruction of the Jedi Order and Republic.
Eventually, by manipulating disaffected political groups and using double agents to sow discord, Palpatine fomented a civil war that provided an opportunity for him to seize absolute power.
He had three known Sith apprentices: Darth Maul, Darth Tyranus, and Darth Vader.
He was eventually betrayed and killed by his last, Vader, at the end of Return of the Jedi.
He returned more than 30 years later in The Rise of Skywalker, having managed to cheat death through powerful mastery of the dark side of the Force.
He was finally killed by his granddaughter, Rey, who deflected his Force lightning back at him using the Skywalker lightsabers.
Darth Sidious' death marked what appears to be the definitive end of the Sith.

In Legends continuity, Darth Sidious would return using clones and ancient Sith powers, returning in several clone bodies over the course of several novels and comics.
During this time he would briefly turn Luke Skywalker to the dark side of the Force through sheer power as much as by guile, though Luke would later be redeemed by his sister Leia and restored to the light side of the Force and defeated Palpatine once and for all.
Shortly before his first death, Palpatine had sent a psychic command through the Force to Mara Jade, planting in her the need to kill Luke.
She eventually fulfilled this command by slaying a clone of Luke called Luuke Skywalker, whom Palpatine had made in an attempt to use him against the original, though this plot ultimately would fail due to Mara's fatal attack on the clone.

=====
Darth Maul =====
Darth Maul (Maul) was a male Dathomirian Zabrak Sith Lord who served as the first apprentice of Darth Sidious.
He first appeared in Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace, where he was ordered by his master to capture Queen Amidala of Naboo in order for her to sign a treaty that would legalize the Trade Federation's invasion of the planet.
After tracking the Queen's personal starship to Tatooine, he briefly attacked Qui-Gon Jinn, the Jedi sent to escort Amidala to Coruscant, but he escaped.
Later, Maul travelled to Naboo to aid the Federation's invasion and again fought Jinn, along with his Padawan Obi-Wan Kenobi in the plasma refinery complex beneath Theed Palace.
Though he managed to kill Jinn, he was then defeated by Kenobi, who sliced him in half, leading to everyone, including Sidious, to believe he had died.
In reality, however, Maul survived his injuries and ended up on the junk planet Lotho Minor, where he would become a cyborg and be driven to insanity.
He was eventually rescued by his brother Savage Opress twelve years later, during the Clone Wars.
After being provided with a pair of new robotic legs by the Nightsisters, led by Maul's mother, Talzin, he sought revenge against Kenobi.
In the process, he recruited several crime syndicates to his cause, forming the Shadow Collective.
He took over Mandalore, only to be defeated and captured by Sidious.
Maul later escaped and managed to rebuild his criminal empire.
Near the end of the war, he engineered a conflict on Mandalore to lure out and kill Anakin Skywalker.
Ahsoka Tano was sent to deal with him instead, and he was captured, only to be freed by Tano when Sidious executed Order 66, causing the clone troopers to turn on their Jedi generals.
During the Galactic Empire era, Maul, having abandoned his Sith persona, led the Crimson Dawn crime syndicate, until being stranded on the Sith world of Malachor for years.
He escaped after meeting Jedi Padawan Ezra Bridger, whom he attempts to turn to the dark side, and later forced to assist in locating Kenobi.
Upon tracking him down to Tatooine, he confronted Kenobi and fought him one final time.
Maul was fatally injured and died in Kenobi's arms, realizing that the latter was looking after the boy he believed to be the Chosen One and would one day avenge those who had suffered because of Sidious and the Sith, including Maul.

=====
Darth Tyranus =====
Darth Tyranus (Count Dooku of Serenno) was a male human Sith Lord and the second apprentice of Darth Sidious, first appearing in Star Wars:
Episode II – Attack of the Clones.
Dooku was a former Jedi Master who was trained by Grandmaster Yoda and took on Qui-Gon Jinn as his apprentice, but later became disillusioned with the Galactic Republic's Senate, realizing that immediate change was needed in order to maintain peace, and turned to the dark side of the Force.
He played an important role in Sidious' plans to take over the galaxy, engineering the Clone Wars by recruiting the bounty hunter Jango Fett as the template for a clone army that would be used by the Republic, and forming the Confederacy of Independent Systems, consisting of numerous planets and systems who wanted to become independent from the Republic.
Dooku served as the figurehead of the Separatist Alliance throughout the Clone Wars until meeting his demise at the hands of Anakin Skywalker in Star Wars:
Episode III - Revenge of the Sith, who decapitated him at Chancellor Palpatine's (secretly Darth Sidious) urgings, thus revealing that Sidious never cared about Dooku and merely used him to aid his plans.
Dooku was succeeded by Anakin himself, who fell to the dark side of the Force shortly after and became Sidious' third apprentice, Darth Vader, accomplishing what Dooku couldn't: helping Sidious wipe out the Jedi Order and form the Galactic Empire.
=====
Darth Vader =====
Darth Vader (Anakin Skywalker) was a male human-cyborg Dark Lord of the Sith and the third and final apprentice of Darth Sidious, who first appeared in the Star Wars original trilogy, and later in the prequel trilogy.
As the Jedi hero Anakin Skywalker, he fought alongside his master Obi-Wan Kenobi during the galaxy-wide Clone Wars, but was slowly seduced to the dark side by Darth Sidious.
After helping Sidious kill Jedi Master Mace Windu, he swore allegiance to the Sith and was given the name Darth Vader before setting out to destroy all Jedi left on Coruscant.
After being sent by Sidious to assassinate the Separatist council members on Mustafar, Vader was badly injured in a duel with Kenobi, resulting in the loss of his remaining organic arm, both legs, and severe burn injuries.
He was saved by Sidious, and encased in a black suit of armor with extensive cybernetics which kept him alive.
As the Galactic Empire was established and continued to grow, Vader became the Emperor's immensely feared second-in-command and was given the task of finding surviving Jedi and the Rebel Alliance's base.
After the destruction of the first Death Star, Vader was charged with tracking down the Rebel Alliance and destroying their headquarters.
However, the actions of his son, Luke Skywalker, eventually turned Vader against his master, resulting in both Sidious' and Vader's deaths, as well as the fulfilment of the Chosen One prophecy.

====
In other media ====


===== Darth Andeddu =====
In the Legends continuity, Darth Andeddu, also known as the Immortal God-King of Prakith, was an ancient Dark Lord of the Sith who lived prior to the invention of the "Darth" title for the Sith.
He was a paranoid man, who believed that his followers were secretly plotting to overthrow him, which eventually came true, as they betrayed and attacked him, seeking to steal his power.
Forced to flee from Korriban, Andeddu created the world of Prakith, where he would rule as a deity for several centuries until meeting his demise and entombing himself to prevent his followers from stealing his secrets even in death.
Prior to his death, he would also create a Sith holocron to store all his knowledge, including the ability to cheat death by transferring one's essence into another vessel, and his cult, called "the Malevolence", would create a temple in the reverence of the Dark Lord, believing that one day he would return.
The legend of Andeddu and his incredible power remained at large long after his death, despite the Jedi Order's attempt to erase all knowledge and reference about the Sith.

In the Star Wars canon, Andeddu is only mentioned in The Rise of Skywalker: The Visual Dictionary, where, even though his backstory is never explained, it is revealed that Darth Sidious' Sith Eternal cult still had knowledge of Andeddu thousands of years after his death and had the 5th Legion of Sith Troopers named after him.

=====
Darth Atrius =====
Darth Atrius was an ancient Dark Lord of the Sith who existed long before the Rule of Two was created.
He owned two crossguard lightsabers, which were found and given away by the smuggler Sana Starros after the Battle of Yavin.
The anger possessed by Atrius when wielding both these crossguard lightsabers at the same time, carried over to the weapons themselves, and can transfer over to their new owners.
These lightsabers were eventually destroyed by Darth Vader and Luke Skywalker, thus possibly erasing all knowledge about Atrius himself.

=====
Darth Caldoth =====
Darth Caldoth was a male Duros Dark Lord of the Sith, who is only mentioned in the 2019 novel Myths & Fables.
He lived at an unknown point in time before Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace and wrote a book titled The Bestiary of Darth Caldoth, which mentioned various Sith warbeasts.
According to the legend, Caldoth eventually gained a Sith apprentice, the Twi'lek Ry Nymbis, and they were considered the two most powerful individuals in the galaxy at one point.
Caldoth killed his own apprentice with a Sith ritual that turned the person's body into stone when he felt Nymbis was going to betray him.
With the ritual, Nymbis was trapped in an eternal nightmare.

=====
Darth Krall =====
Darth Krall (Radaki) was a male Dark Lord of the Sith, who is only mentioned in the audiobook Dooku:
Jedi Lost.
He lived at an unknown point in time before Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace and was seduced to the dark side after losing his faith in the Jedi Order, believing that the Jedi should retain their family ties and wealth.
His most notable feats were taking part in the Battle of Wasted Years, where the Sith emerged victorious, and taming the Nightmare Conjunction.
His lightsaber would later be stored in the Bogan Collection at the Jedi Temple on Coruscant.

=====
Darth Skrye =====
Darth Skrye was a female Dark Lord of the Sith, who is only mentioned in the audiobook Dooku:
Lost Jedi.
Shoulde lived at an unknown point in time before Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace.
Her voice was heard by Count Dooku during his time as a Jedi Padawan, in a Force vision that he had after encountering the Presagers of Hakotei on Asusto.
In this vision, Skrye claimed that the Sith were reborn before activating a superweapon called the Cauldron, which destroyed a planet.
She also owned an artifact called the Hand of Skrye, which would eventually be found by Jedi Lene Kostana and Sifo-Dyas on Rishi.

=====
Darth Wrend =====
Darth Wrend was a Dark Lord of the Sith who is only mentioned in the novel and audiobook Master & Apprentice.
He lived at an unknown point in time before Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace, and was best known for coming back to life after being killed by the Jedi Order, in order to fight them once again.
The legend of Darth Wrend would come to Qui-Gon Jinn's mind during his time as a Padawan, who opened the holocron of prophecy, which contained numerous prophecies of which several dated ten thousand years prior.
One of the prophecies said that evil would disappear yet appear again once the righteous had lost its light, which many believed that was referring to the return of the Sith.
At that time, Qui-Gon believed that the prophecy talked about Darth Wrend's return from the dead and that it had already been fulfilled, although it would later be revealed that the prophecy referred to the Jedi learning about Darth Sidious' existence and that the Sith had lived in secret for almost a millennium.

=====
Darth Tanis =====
Darth Tanis was an ancient Dark Lord of the Sith who lived at least 4,000 years before the events of Star Wars:
Episode IV – A New Hope, as Sith accounts from the year
3966 BBY described kyber weaponry developed by him on the planet Malachor.
Darth Tanis is only mentioned in The Rise of Skywalker: The Visual Dictionary, where it is revealed that Darth Sidious' Sith Eternal cult still had knowledge of Tanis thousands of years after his death and had the 17th Legion of Sith Troopers named after him.

=====
Darth Desolous =====
In the Legends continuity, Darth Desolous was a male Pau'an Dark Lord of the Sith who was expelled from the Jedi Order due to his violent nature and trained an army of fellow Pau'an warriors to fight them, but ended up falling into a trap set by the Jedi and perished in battle.
His image would later be incorporated in the training simulations at the Jedi Temple on Coruscant.

In the Star Wars canon, Darth Desolous is only mentioned in The Rise of Skywalker: The Visual Dictionary, where, even though his backstory is never explained, it is revealed that Darth Sidious' Sith Eternal cult still had knowledge of Desolous thousands of years after his death and had the 44th Legion of Sith Troopers named after him.

=====
Darth Phobos =====
In the Legends continuity, Darth Phobos was a Theelin Dark Lady of the Sith with mind manipulation abilities, who killed many of her fellow Sith in a bid of power and formed a cult to worship her, but was ultimately killed by the combined forces of the Jedi and Sith.
Her image would later be incorporated in the training simulations at the Jedi Temple on Coruscant.

In the Star Wars canon, Darth Phobos is only mentioned in The Rise of Skywalker: The Visual Dictionary, where, even though her backstory is never explained, it is revealed that Darth Sidious' Sith Eternal cult still had knowledge of Phobos thousands of years after her death and had the 39th Legion of Sith Troopers named after her.

=====
Darth Revan =====
In the Legends continuity, Darth Revan was both a male Dark Lord of the Sith and Jedi Knight, who served as the main protagonist of the video game
Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic, and a major character in the Knights of the Old Republic series overall.
He lived approximately 4,000 years before the events of Star Wars:
Episode IV – A New Hope.
Once Jedi heroes who led the Republic to victory in the Mandalorian Wars, Revan and his comrade, Alek, turned to the dark side after stumbling upon the Sith Empire, hidden in the Unknown Reaches of space, and being tortured by the Sith Emperor.
Upon escaping, the pair formed their own Sith Empire to wage war on the Republic, with Revan as the leader and Alek, now Darth Malak, as his Sith Apprentice.
As a Sith, Revan prepared to battle with the Jedi who boarded his flagship, but Malak, in the hopes of destroying both Revan and Bastila Shan, betrayed his master, ordering the ships under his command to fire on Revan's flagship's bridge.
Revan was critically injured and taken by Bastila Shan to the Jedi Council Enclave.
The Council chose to wipe Revan's memory, and imprint him with a false identity.
Revan later awoke on a starship under attack and encountered Malak, who eventually revealed the truth of his identity.
Following this, Revan defeated Malak in a final battle, claiming victory for the Republic.
Revan later married Bastila Shan with the approval of the Jedi Council and eventually departed into the Unknown Regions to confront the Sith Emperor, but was imprisoned for 300 years until his descendant Satele Shan rescued him.
However, due to being imprisoned for centuries, his lighter half had perished and became a Force spirit, leaving only his darker half, which sought to destroy the Sith Emperor once and for all.
Since the Emperor's physical body had already been destroyed, leaving only his spirit, Revan planned to resurrect him so that he could then kill him for good.
However, he was ultimately defeated by the combined forces of the Republic and his lighter half.
The two halves of Revan then merged in peace and died for the final time, although, unbeknownst to everyone, the Sith Emperor had been resurrected and escaped into the galaxy.
Following his death, Revan would be remembered by the galaxy for thousand of years, both as a legendary Jedi hero and one of the most powerful Sith Lords to have ever lived.

In the Star Wars canon, Darth Revan is only mentioned in The Rise of Skywalker: The Visual Dictionary, where, even though his backstory is never explained, it is revealed that Darth Sidious' Sith Eternal cult still had knowledge of Revan thousands of years after his death and had the 3rd Legion of Sith Troopers named after him.
Revan was also originally set to appear in the episode "Ghosts of Mortis" of The Clone Wars TV show alongside Darth Bane, but they were both ultimately cut.

=====
Darth Momin =====
Darth Momin (Momin) was a male Dark Lord of Sith who appeared in the novel series Darth Vader:
Dark Lord of the Sith and the 4th issue of the Lando comic book.
Once a sculptor, he was imprisoned at a young age for his creations, which scared most people who saw them.
Momin was eventually rescued by a woman named Shaa, who trained him in the dark side of the Force and whom he eventually killed after believing that he had become more powerful than his master.
Momin then built a superweapon to destroy an entire city and perished when the Jedi intervened to stop him, losing control over the energy he wielded and causing his physical body to be destroyed, leaving only his mask with his consciousness inside.
Years later, the mask would be retrieved from the Jedi Archive vault by Darth Sidious, who gave it to his apprentice Darth Vader as a gift for his journey to Mustafar, which Vader sought to make his personal stronghold.
After Momin's spirit killed some of his personnel, Vader examined the mask and learned of Momin's past, before letting him possess the body of a Mustafarian and build a fortress for him.
Shortly after Momin finished building of the fortress, Vader was distracted by an invasion of Mustafarians, which Momin took advantage of to open the door to the Dark Side and resurrect himself.
However, after challenging Vader to a duel, Momin met a quick demise by being crushed with a giant rock.
Despite Momin's death, his dark essence would remain in the mask for years to come.
At one point, Momin's mask was located aboard the Imperial yacht Imperialis, when a group of thieves led by Lando Calrissian attempt to rob the ship.
After Momin's spirit possessed the bodies of two thieves, the others abandoned them and destroyed the ship, seemingly ending Momin's legacy.
Luke Skywalker later learned about Momin and his history during his travels across the galaxy, and described the Sith Lord's role in building Vader's fortress in his book, titled The Secrets of the Jedi.

=====
Darth Bane =====
Darth Bane (Dessel) was a male human Dark Lord of the Sith and the sole survivor of Sith Order in the aftermath of the ancient war between the Jedi and the Sith.
He is best known for establishing the Rule of Two, which was considered the beginning of the modern Sith within the Star Wars canon.
This rule stated that there must be only two Sith Lords at a time: a master to embody power, and an apprentice to crave it and eventually overthrow his/her master and adopt an apprentice of his/her own.
He is the main character of the non-canonical Darth Bane Trilogy by Drew Karpyshyn.

In the Star Wars canon, Darth Bane's backstory as the only Sith surivor of the Jedi-Sith war and the creator of the Rule of Two is mostly unchanged, though not much else is known about him.
His only appearance was in the episode "Sacrifice" of Star Wars:
The Clone Wars, where his spirit was encountered by Yoda on the Sith homeworld of Moraband.
Bane was also originally set to appear in the episode "Ghosts of Mortis" alongside Darth Revan, but they were both ultimately cut.

=====
Darth Tenebrous =====
In the Legends continuity, Darth Tenebrous (Rugess Nome) was a male Bith Dark Lord of the Sith with the power of foreseeing the future, including his own death, and the master of both Darth Plagueis and Darth Venamis, the latter of whom he kept secret as it was a violation of the Rule of Two.
His public persona was Rugess Tome, a legendary artisanal starship designer with a galaxy-spanning reputation, and he was known for being a scientific genius and master planner, as well as for his breathing apparatus.
Tenebrous' secret plan was to possess the Chosen One once he would appear, but he was eventually killed by Plagueis during a mission on the planet Ban'demnic.
However, Tenebrous wasn't too surprised at Plagueis's betrayal and instead congratulated him with his dying breath, because his conscience would soon be able to enter his apprentice's body.
Despite managing to cheat death, Tenebrous' plan failed, because, during his time in Plagueis' body, he foresaw him being killed by his own apprentice before the appearance of the Chosen One, meaning that Tenebrous would never be able to possess him.
Tenebrous then tried to escape from Plagueis' body, but only saw the mummified remains of his original body, as decades had passed since his death.
As such, Tenebrous was cursed to remain a vague spirit for the rest of eternity, unable to gain a physical body ever again.

In the Star Wars canon continuity, Darth Tenebrous is only mentioned in The Rise of Skywalker: The Visual Dictionary, where, even though his backstory is never explained, it is revealed that Darth Sidious' Sith Eternal cult still had knowledge of Tenebrous many years after his death and had the 26th Legion of Sith Troopers named after him.

=====
Darth Plagueis =====
Darth Plagueis was a male Dark Lord of the Sith and Darth Sidious' master, first referenced in Star Wars:
Episode III - Revenge of the Sith.
In the film, Sidious (as Palpatine) uses Plagueis' story to seduce Anakin Skywalker to the dark side, claiming that Plagueis' abilities in the Force grew to such an extent that he could create life by influencing microscopic force-sensitive entities called "midi-chlorians," and even save people from dying.
According to the Rule of Two, Plagueis was eventually killed by Sidious in his sleep, who subsequently became the new Sith Master and would later take on an apprentice of his own.

In the Legends continuity, Plagueis was a Muun and maintained a public influence as the benevolent Hego Damsk II, a member of the Intergalactic Banking Clan.
He is the main character of the non-canonica novel, Star Wars: Darth Plagueis.

====
Shadow Hands of the Sith ===
=
Although not official Sith, several other dark side users in the service of the Sith were present during the Clone Wars and the initial years of the Galactic Empire.

=====
Asajj Ventress =====
Asajj Ventress was a female Dathomirian Sith Shadow Hand trained under Darth Tyranus and an antagonist of the Star Wars:
The Clone Wars.
She first appeared in the now non-canonical 2003 series Star Wars:
Clone Wars, in which Darth Sidious assigned her to kill the then-Padawan Anakin Skywalker.
After tracking the young war hero to the planet Muunilinst, Ventress engaged Anakin's Republic fighter forces fighting above the Separatist-occupied world and baited him in a chase to Yavin 4, where a fierce battle from the forest to the Massassi temple took place.
Though she initially gained the upper hand in the ensuing lightsaber duel, Anakin called upon his immense connection to the Force to brutally overpower her, causing the Dathomirian to fall over the edge of a cliff.
She luckily survived the landing and continued to serve her master throughout the Clone Wars on several occasions.

In Star Wars:
The Clone Wars, Ventress was a recurring antagonist during the first seasons, as she assisted Dooku with several schemes, most of which were thwarted by the Jedi.
After being replaced with Savage Opress for her failures, Ventress returned to the Nightsisters until General Grievous led a massacre against them, which only she and Mother Talzin survived.
From there, she helped Boba Fett's team of bounty hunters on a dangerous mission, which thus marked the start of her own bounty hunting career.
Ventres later appeared in the novel Star Wars: Dark Disciple, which was intended for a story arc in the TV series.
In the novel, she teamed up with Jedi Quinlan Vos to assassinate Count Dooku, and, along the way, the two fell in love.
However, their attempt to kill Dooku failed, and Dooku captured Vos, turning him to the dark side.
Ventress managed to turn Vos back, but died saving him from an angered Dooku and was later buried on Dathomir, amongst her fallen sisters.

=====
Savage Opress =====
Savage Opress was a male Dathomirian Zabrak Sith Shadow Hand first trained under Darth Tyrannus and later under his own brother, Darth Maul, as well as a major antagonist in Star Wars: The Clone Wars.
Originally a Nightbrother under Mother Talzin on Dathomir, he was handpicked by Asajj Ventress as part of her scheme to kill Darth Tyrannus for the attempt on her life.
His mind was eventually altered by the Nightsisters, making him more of a berserker on Ventress' call to the point of killing his brother Feral without remorse.
Opress managed to become Tyrannus' new Shadow Hand and learned only a little about the ways of the Sith before Ventress had him help her fight their master due to his actions under him getting unwanted attention from the Jedi.
However, in the heat of the moment and provoked by both of them, Opress tried to kill both Tyrannus and Ventress before escaping back to Dathomir.
There, he was instructed by Mother Talzin to find Maul so that he could complete his training to defend himself against the numerous enemies he had made.
After finding his long-lost brother as a shell of his former self on a junk planet, Opress managed to stir up Maul's grudge with Obi-Wan Kenobi to aid him in his revenge against the Jedi.
From there, the Zabrak duo were able to set up a Confederacy against the Republic separate from the Separatists, and soon took over Mandalore.
However, they received an unexpected visit by Darth Sidious, who considered Maul's sudden rise to power a threat to his rule, and dueled both him and Opress.
The latter met a quick demise after being stabbed with Sidious' two lightsabers, and died in Maul's arms.

=====
Inquisitorius =====
The Inquisitors were an organization of Force-sensitive warriors in the service of the Galactic Empire prior to the events of A New Hope, where it is implied that they all became defunct, as Darth Vader and Darth Sidious were the only known Force-wielders at that time.
Most of them were former Jedi, who had lost their faith in the Jedi Order and succumbed to the dark side, during or shortly after the Clone Wars.
They were all recruited into the Empire and trained by Darth Vader, who tasked them with hunting down other survivors of the Great Jedi Purge, as well as other Force-sensitive individuals, mostly children, to prevent them from becoming future Jedi.
Among the known Inquisitors were: 

The Grand Inquisitor - the individual who would become known as the Grand Inquisitor was a former Pau'an Jedi Temple Guard.
He was one of the several guards who escorted the fallen Jedi Barris Offee for her trial after the bombing of the Jedi Temple in the episode "The Wrong Jedi" of Star Wars: The Clone Wars.
He later lost his faith in the Jedi Order and turned to the dark side, before coming into service of the Empire.
Over the years, the Inquisitor worked his way up the Empire's ranks and eventually became the highest-ranking Inquisitor, being tasked (along with his subordinates) with hunting down Force-sensitive children across the galaxy and preventing them from becoming Jedi.
The Grand Inquisitor first appeared as the main antagonist of the first season of Star Wars: Rebels, where he was assigned to hunt down Kanan Jarrus and Ezra Bridger.
He was eventually defeated by Kanan in combat and chose to commit suicide rather than face the infamous wrath of Darth Vader for his failure.
A vision of the Grand Inquisitor in his old Jedi Temple Guard attire later appeared to Kanan in the Jedi Temple on Lothal and dueled him as part of his final trial to become a Jedi Knight.

The Second Sister - Trilla Suduri was the Padawan of Jedi Knight Cere Junda and one of the few survivors of the Great Jedi Purge.
After Cere was captured and interrogated by the Empire, she betrayed Trilla's location, leading to her being captured and tortured by the Empire as well, until giving into the dark side and becoming the Second Sister Inquisitor.
She initially made a cameo appearance in the novel Darth Vader:
Dark Lord of the Sith, and later served as the main antagonist of the video game Star Wars Jedi:
Fallen Order, where she was tasked with hunting Jedi Padawan Cal Kestis, as well as a holocron containing a list of Force-sensitive children.
Although she succeeded in securing the holocron, she was eventually defeated by Kestis and Cere at the Inquisitor headquarters on the planet
Nur.
Cere then attempted to make amends with her former Padawan, but Darth Vader appeared and killed Trilla for failing her mission.

The Fifth Brother - the Fifth Brother was a former green-skinned humanoid male member of the Jedi Order who eventually lost his faith in the Order and became an Inquisitor sometime after the end of the Clone Wars and the rise of the Empire.
He was introduced in the second season of Star Wars:
Rebels, where he was shown to be working closely with the Seventh Sister, as they were both tasked with hunting the Ghost crew after the Grand Inquisitor's death, during which they also competed against each other to become the next Grand Inquisitor.
The Fifth Brother was eventually defeated after dueling Kanan Jarrus, Ezra Bridger, Ahsoka Tano and Maul on Malachor, being disarmed by Ahsoka and subsequently killed by Maul.

The Sixth Brother - Bil Valen was a former humanoid Jedi Knight who eventually lost his faith in the Jedi Order and became the Sixth Brother Inquisitor sometime after the end of the Clone Wars and the rise of the Empire.
He was described as tall with unnatural-looking grey skin, piercing ice-blue eyes, broad shoulders, and distinctive scar/tattoo-like marking, and was also shown to have lost an arm to Darth Vader during one of his training sessions.
The Sixth Brother only appeared in novels, most prominently in Ahsoka, where he was tasked with hunting Ahsoka Tano, but was ultimately defeated by her after she caused his lightsaber to overload and explode, killing him.
His lightsaber would later be rebuilt by Ahsoka into two white ones, which she would use for years to come.

The Seventh Sister -
the Seventh Sister was a former female Mirialan member of the Jedi Order who eventually lost her faith in the Order and became an Inquisitor sometime after the end of the Clone Wars and the rise of the Empire.
She was introduced in the second season of Star Wars:
Rebels, where she was shown to be using small droids to help her track down her targets, and was also working closely with the Fifth Brother, as they were both tasked with hunting the Ghost crew after the Grand Inquisitor's death, during which they also competed against each other to become the next Grand Inquisitor.
The Seventh Sister was eventually defeated by Maul on Malachor and subsequently killed by him, after Ezra Bridger refused to do so.

The Eighth Brother -
the Eighth Brother was a former male Terrelian Jango Jumper member of the Jedi Order who eventually lost his faith in the Order and became an Inquisitor sometime after the end of the Clone Wars and the rise of the Empire.
He was introduced in the second-season finale of Star Wars:
Rebels, where he was tasked with hunting the former Sith Darth Maul, eventually tracking him down to Malachor.
He dueled Maul, Kanan Jarrus, Ezra Bridger, and Ahsoka Tano alongside his fellow Inquisitors, the Fifth Brother and the Seventh Sister, but they were both ultimately killed by Maul.
Cornered, the Eighth Brother then attempted to escape, but his lightsaber had been damaged in battle and exploded in his hands when trying to use it to fly away, causing him to fall to his death.

The Ninth Sister - Masana Tide was a former female Dowutin Jedi Knight who eventually succumbed to the dark side and became the Ninth Sister Inquisitor after intense torture at the hands of the Empire.
She first appeared in the novel Darth Vader:
Dark Lord of the Sith, where she assisted Darth Vader, the Sixth Brother and the Tenth Brother in hunting the Jedi Ferren Barr on the planet Mon Cala.
After Barr used the Force to turn the Imperial stormtroopers present against them, the Ninth Sister was betrayed by the Sixth Brother, who severed her right foot and left her behind to die so that he could escape, although she managed to survive the ordeal as well.
She later appeared as an antagonist in the video game Star Wars Jedi:
Fallen Order, where she joined the Second Sister in the hunt for Cal Kestis.
The Ninth Sister was ultimately defeated by the young Padawan on Kashyyyk, who severed her right hand as well.
However, she survived the ordeal once again.

The Tenth Brother - Prosset Dibs was a former blind human Jedi Master during the Clone Wars who eventually became disillusioned by the Jedi's role as protectors of the galaxy.
He first appeared in the novel Jedi of the Republic - Mace Windu, where he tried to kill Mace Windu during a mission on the planet Hissrich.
He was subsequently put on trial and expelled from the Jedi Order for his actions.
Dibs later became the Tenth Brother Inquisitor in the service of the Empire and appeared in the novel Darth Vader:
Dark Lord of the Sith, where he assisted Darth Vader, the Sixth Brother and the Ninth Sister in hunting the Jedi Ferren Barr on the planet Mon Cala.
After Barr used the Force to turn the Imperial stormtroopers present against them, the Tenth Brother was killed in the ensuing fight.

Unnamed red-skinned Inquisitor - An unnamed red-skinned female Inquisitor appeared in the novel Darth Vader:
Dark Lord of the Sith, where she assisted Darth Vader, the Fifth Brother and another black-skinned Twi'lek Inquisitor in hunting Jedi Master Eeth Koth.
While Vader dueled and killed Koth, the female Inquisitor found his wife and baby daughter, but refused to kill them, instead taking the latter and bringing her to Vader, who then left her in the care of some nursemaids.
Later, the Fifth Brother informed Vader of her actions and, believing it to be an act of treason, he tried to kill her in front of the other Inquisitors.
She managed to escape with the help of her fellow Twi'lek Inquisitor, but they were both eventually caught following a long chase through Coruscant and chose to commit suicide rather than be killed by Vader.

Unnamed Twi'lek Inquisitor
- A black-skinned male Twi'lek Inquisitor appeared in the novel Darth Vader:
Dark Lord of the Sith, where he assisted Darth Vader, the Fifth Brother and another red-skinned female Inquisitor in hunting Jedi Master Eeth Koth.
Later, when Vader tried to kill the female Inquisitor for treason, he helped her escape, but they were both eventually caught following a long chase through Coruscant and chose to commit suicide rather than be killed by Vader.

====
New Republic-era dark side wielders ====
Although not official Sith, several dark side users were present in the years following the fall of the Galactic Empire and during the conflict between the Resistance and the First Order.

=====
Snoke =====
Snoke was an artificial being created by Darth Sidious and his Sith Eternal cult on Exegol, and a major antagonist in the Star Wars sequel trilogy.
After Palpatine's death and the fall of the Empire, Snoke became the Supreme Leader of the First Order and seduced Ben Solo to the dark side, training him to become his apprentice, Kylo Ren.
He was also behind the destruction of Luke Skywalker's Jedi Temple and the deaths of most of his students, in an attempt to wipe out the Jedi Order once and for all.
He was ultimately killed by Ren, after failing to foresee his betrayal.
Following Snoke's death, Ren took over as Supreme Leader of the First Order.

=====
Kylo Ren =====
Kylo Ren (Ben Solo) was a former Jedi and powerful dark side wielder, and the central antagonist of the Star Wars sequel trilogy.
He was born as the son of Leia Organa and Han Solo, and trained under his uncle, Luke Skywalker, to become a Jedi, but was seduced to the dark side by Snoke.
Adopting the alias Kylo Ren, he helped eliminate his uncle's new generation of Jedi and became the leader of the Knights of Ren and a high-ranking member of the First Order.
He trained under Snoke to become a powerful dark side wielder, and later proved his loyalty by killing his father when he tried to help him get redeemed.
However, Ren eventually betrayed and killed his master after siding with the Jedi Padwan Rey, with whom he shared a unique connection called a "dyad in the Force".
However, instead of turning back to the light side, he took over as the new Supreme Leader of the First Order, and invited Rey to join him, but she refused.
Later, Ren had a confrontation with Luke, only to discover that he was a Force projection, meant to distract him and allow the Resistance to escape; nonetheless, Luke died as a result of the effort to create the projection, leaving Rey the only living Jedi.
Eventually, Ren discovered that the Sith Lord Darth Sidious was still alive and plotted to kill this potential rival, but instead sided to him after he revealed the Final Order, a massive fleet of Xyston-class Star Destroyers equipped with axial superlasers capable of decimating entire planets, which he promised to give Ren control of in exchange for killing Rey, revealed to be his granddaughter.
Secretly, however, Ren planned to have Rey help him kill Sidious, and engaged her in a duel when she refused, which Ren lost after his mother gave her life to reach out to him through the Force.
After a conversation with a memory of his late father, Ben Solo was redeemed and came to Rey's aid in defeating Sidious.
After Rey died to kill the Sith Lord, Ben revived her using the Force, and shared a kiss with her, but then died as a result of using all his life energy to save her, becoming one with the Force.
=====
Knights of Ren =====
The Knights of Ren were an organization of masked Force-wielding warriors, who served as antagonists in the Star Wars
sequel trilogy.
The Knights were neither Sith or Jedi, but a new generation of dark side warriors that emerged to fill the void left by the supposed demise of the last Sith Lords, Darth Sidious and Darth Vader.
They had a code, to which they were flexible in the following: living life the way they wanted, taking what the galaxy gave them, and consuming what the dark side sent them.
Their name came from a lightsaber called "Ren", which was at the base of their code and could only be wielded by their leader.
The Knights consisted of seven individuals named Ren (their leader), Vicrul, Ap'lek, Cardo, Kuruk, Trudgen, and Ushar.
After his fall to the dark side, Ben Solo joined the Knights and eventually killed Ren, becoming their new leader, under the alias Kylo Ren, knighting his former fellow Padawan Voe as a knight through her shoulders, before reforging her lightsaber into one for himself.
After Kylo became the Supreme Leader of the First Order, the Knights became his personal guards, though they ultimately sided with the resurrected Darth Sidious after Ben Solo returned to the light side, which led to their demise at the hands of the redeemed Ben.

====
Sith Eternal ====
The 2019 film Star Wars
: The Rise of Skywalker depicts thousands of Sith cultists and loyalists known as the Sith Eternal.
They are the main antagonistic faction in the Star Wars sequel trilogy.
They are located on the Sith planet Exegol, which is described in the film as the "hidden world of the Sith".
The film depicts the Sith loyalists as having built the Final Order, a massive fleet of Xyston-class Star Destroyers, at the behest of Emperor Palpatine (Darth Sidious).
They are also revealed to have artificially created and cloned Snoke, whom Palpatine used as a puppet to control the First Order and seduce Kylo Ren to the dark side.
At the end of the film, the Sith Eternal cultists are present during Palpatine's rejuvenation through the Force and his demise at the hands of Rey, the last Jedi and Palpatine's granddaughter.
The Sith Eternal cultists are disintegrated in the explosion following Palpatine's death.
The novelization of The Rise of Skywalker goes into more detail about how Palpatine transferred his consciousness into the cloned body the Sith Eternal prepared for him.

====
Legends non-canonical members of the Sith ====
Following the 2012 acquisition of Lucasfilm by The Walt Disney Company, Lucasfilm rebranded most of the licensed Star Wars novels, comics, and other fictional media published since the original 1977 film (previously identified as the Star Wars Expanded Universe) as Star Wars Legends and declared them non-canonical to the franchise in April
2014.The Sith feature heavily in many stories of the Star Wars Expanded Universe (EU),
appearing in a variety of media created prior to the advent of the 2015 feature film Star Wars: The Force Awakens.
Future authors and screenwriters are not required to honor all of the events depicted in this material, but the Expanded Universe has remained a source of creative inspiration.
The EU thoroughly details the schism between the dissident “Dark Jedi” and the Jedi establishment that led to the creation of the Sith Order, as well a series of conflicts between the Sith, Jedi and the Galactic Republic spanning the millennia prior to the events of the Star Wars motion picture series, and certain events thereafter.

In the EU, the Sith trace their origins to the followers of a dissident Jedi named Ajunta Pall, who endorsed the use of the Dark Side of the Force, contrary to Jedi orthodoxy.
After Pall and his “Dark Jedi” followers were exiled for their practices, they eventually settled on a planet named Korriban, which was occupied by the "Sith," a red-skinned humanoid race with a high prevalence of Force-sensitives.
Over the course of centuries of intermingling between the ethnic Sith and Dark Jedi, the name "Sith" would come to apply to the martial philosophy and political affiliation created by the former Jedi exiles on Korriban, rather than a specific race.
This Sith regime would strike out at the Galactic Republic and Jedi on numerous occasions.
Notable conflicts between the Sith and the Galactic Republic include the "Great Hyperspace War," in which the Sith would launch a massive invasion of the Republic but succumb to infighting, and the “Sith Holocaust,” in which the Galactic Republic failed in its attempt to exterminate the Sith from known space, leading the Sith survivors to take a vow of eternal vengeance on the Galactic Republic.
The EU also describes the exploits of Sith characters following the collapse of Emperor Palpatine's Galactic Empire and the restoration of the Republic, such as the attempt by “Darth Krayt” to establish a New Sith Order on Korriban.

The first Expanded Universe novel was Splinter of the Mind's Eye, written by Alan Dean Foster and published in 1978.
The setting for the novel takes place between Episode IV:
A New Hope and Episode V:
The Empire Strikes Back.
It provides a new adventure that includes Princess Leia, R2-D2, C-3PO, Luke Skywalker and Darth Vader.
In the story, Darth Vader tries to get the Kyber Crystal to use it for his evil schemes.

Other novels that depict Sith characters are Darth Maul:
Saboteur and Cloak of Deception by James Luceno.
Cloak of Deception describes the political background surrounding the Republic in the time period before The Phantom Menace, as well as Darth Sidious' plans to rule the galaxy, starting with the blockade of Naboo.

In Darth Maul: Saboteur, the Sith Lord Darth Sidious sends Darth Maul to destroy InterGalactic Ore and Lommite Limited.
In Darth Maul: Shadow Hunter, by Michael Reaves, Darth Sidious sends his apprentice, Darth Maul, to investigate the traitor who leaked the secret of his plan to take down the Republic.
Shadow Hunter provided insight into the Sith while detailing how Darth Sidious brought his plan of usurpation into action.

Dark Horse Comics purchased the copyrights to several Star Wars stories.
With their publication of Star Wars:
Dark Empire #1 in 1991, they initiated what has become a large line of Star Wars manga and comics.
The Sith appear as major antagonists throughout this story's plot.
Many of the comics that were published helped expand the backstory of the characters and followed the rise and fall of the Dark Lords of the Sith.
Star Wars video games have also been adapted from the plots of the films, novels, and TV shows.
The games follow the basic plot of the story, but they can also include alternative, non-canonical, endings depending on which character is being played.
Some of the video games that have a heavy focus on Sith characters and lore are Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic, released in 2003, Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic II –
The Sith Lords, released in 2004 and Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed, released in 2008.
=====
Darth Caedus =====
Darth Caedus (Jacen Solo) was a Dark Lord of the Sith born as the oldest son of Han Solo and Leia Organa Solo.
A Jedi hero of the Yuuzhan Vong War
, he eventually fell to the Dark Side years later and masterminded the Second Galactic Civil War.
He was eventually killed by his twin sister Jaina for his actions.

=====
Marka Ragnos =====
Marka Ragnos was an ancient Sith-human hybrid Sith Lord, who lived during the time of the first Sith Empire, and seized the title of Dark Lord of the Sith, serving as the ruler of the Empire.
After his death, two Sith Lords, Naga Sadow and Ludo Kressh, fought to occupy his throne, only for Ragnos' spirit to appear before them and claim that only the most worthy should succeed him.
Ragnos lived on as a Force spirit following his death, trapped within his tomb in the Valley of the Dark Lords on Korriban.
A thousand years after the Dark Lord's death, Exar Kun summoned Ragnos from his grave through the use of talismans.
Ragnos crowned Exar Kun as the new Dark Lord, with Ulic Qel-Droma as Kun's apprentice, as an attempt to resurrect the lost empire thousands of years prior.
Several thousands of years after that, in the video game Star Wars Jedi Knight:
Jedi Academy (set during the New Republic era), a cult dedicated to Ragnos, led by the Dark Jedi Tavion Axmis, raised as a new threat to the galaxy, with the intent of resurrecting the Sith Lord using an old artifact called the Scepter of Ragnos.
After absorbing Force energy from numerous locations across the galaxy using the scepter, Tavion and her cult traveled to Korriban and almost succeeded in resurrecting Ragnos, but were stopped by Luke Skywalker's New Jedi Order.
Inside Ragnos' tomb, the Jedi Knight Jaden Korr defeated Tavion, before Ragnos' spirit emerged and possessed her body, attempting to kill the Jedi.
However, Jaden was able to defeat Ragnos, whose spirit left Tavion's body and returned to the depths of the Force, swearing revenge against the Jedi.

=====
Darth Venamis =====
Darth Venamis was a Bith Dark Lord of the Sith who served as Darth Tenebrous' secret apprentice, as it was a violation of the Rule of Two.
After Tenebrous was killed by his other apprentice, Darth Plagueis, he eventually found and defeated Venamis, before capturing him and using him as a test subject for his midi-chlorians experiments over the following years.
After decades of torture and being killed and then brought back to life over and over again, Plaugeis finally allowed Venamis to die, having served his purpose.
However, he later revived again in the presence of his new apprentice, Darth Sidious, until Venamis' organs finally ceased to function, and he died for the final time.

====
=
Knights of the Old Republic series =====


=====
Darth Malak =====
Darth Malak (Alek) is the main antagonist of Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic.
Once a Jedi Knight and Revan's best friend, the two of them fought together in the Mandalorian Wars.
At some point, Alek was injured in battle and had his entire lower jaw cut off, forcing him to don a prosthetic jaw instead.
Later, Alek and Revan unwittingly discovered the Sith Empire in the Unknown Regions and were captured by the Sith Emperor, who, using Sith sorcery, turned them to the dark side, but the two broke free from his control and formed their own Sith Empire to wage war on the Republic, with Revan as the leader and Alek, now Darth Malak, as his Sith Apprentice.
When Revan prepared to battle the Jedi who boarded his flagship, Malak betrayed him, ordering the ships under his command to fire on Revan's flagship's bridge, so that he could take over the Sith Empire for himself.
However, Revan survived the ordeal and was taken to the Jedi Council Enclave, where he had his memory wiped, so that he would become a Jedi once again.
Eventually, Revan faced off against Malak, who revealed the truth of his identity, but was ultimately killed in battle by his former friend and Sith Master, which also led to the downfall of his Empire.

=====
Darth Traya =====
Darth Traya (Kreia) is a mentor to the "Jedi Exile" and the hidden main antagonist of Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic II –
The Sith Lords.
She is revealed to have been a Sith Master at the end of the game, and is ultimately killed in battle.

=====
Darth Sion =====
Darth Sion, also known as the Lord of Pain, is an antagonist in Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic II –
The Sith Lords.
Alongside Darth Nihilus, he served as one of Traya's apprentices, until ultimately betraying her and driving her into exile.
Sion managed to achieve immortality by calling on his pain, anger and hatred every time he was facing certain death, at the expense of all-consuming agony, which also led to his extremely disfigured appearance.
The player's character eventually defeated Sion, and was then given the option to turn him back to the light side.
Regardless, upon being shown the price he paid for immortality, Sion finally let go of his hate and allowed himself to die permanently.
=====
Darth Nihilus =====
Darth Nihilus, also known as the Lord of Hunger, is an antagonist in Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic II –
The Sith Lords.
Alongside Darth Sion, he served as one of Traya's apprentices, until ultimately betraying her and driving her into exile.
Nihilus imbued his dark soul into his mask and robes and had the power to drain the life force out of any living thing.
Following the betrayal of his master, Nihilus used the might of the Sith Armada not to conquer planets, but to contain them so that he could "feed" off the Force energy of each planet's lifeforms, wiping planets of life.
However, Nihilus was later drawn out and tricked into launching an attack on Telos, believing it to contain the last Jedi.
The Exile confronted Nihilus on his ship, and Nihilus was killed either after his former slave Visas sacrificed herself due to their shared link in the Force, or after his attempt to feast on the Exile's connection to the Force backfired and weakened him.
Despite his death, Nihilus' soul would continue to live in his mask and robes for millennia to come, as well as inside his own Sith holocron.

=====
Lord Vitiate =====
Known for much of his 1300-year life as "the Sith Emperor", Lord Vitiate was a sociopathic young lord in one of the earliest iterations of the Sith Empire.
When that empire fell, he led an exodus of survivors to the other side of the galaxy to establish a continuation of it, with himself as Emperor.
It was Vitiate who corrupted Revan and Malak, but Revan's redemption and Malak's defeat seemingly derailed his plans.
Three hundred years after Revan's disappearance, the Emperor launched a surprise attack on the Republic, setting the stage for the video game
Star Wars: The Old Republic.
=====
Darth Malgus =====
Darth Malgus (Veradun) is a major antagonist in Star Wars:
The Old Republic.
A male human Dark Lord of the Sith who trained under Vindican
, Malgus served the Sith Empire during the Great Galactic War against the Republic.
Following the recapture of Korriban from the Jedi, Malgus killed his master and later led a surprise assault on Alderaan, only to be defeated by his nemesis and former opponent from Korriban, Satele Shan.
Malgus was severely injured in the fight against Shan, forcing him to wear a respiratory apparatus for the rest of his life.
Sometime later, Malgus was tasked by his superior, Darth Angral, with leading an assault team on the Jedi Temple on Coruscant, which Malgus and his forces destroyed, disgracing the Jedi Order in the eyes of the Republic.
Although Malgus believed that the Battle of Coruscant was the first step of destroying the Republic, it only served as leverage in the peace negotiations that took place on Alderaan.
While the Alderaanian summit progressed, the Sith settled into an occupation of Coruscant.
Malgus was placed in charge of orbital security, but the Sith Lord defied his orders and traveled back to Coruscant's surface to strike against the renegade Jedi Aryn Leneer, who wanted to avenge her master Ven Zallow, killed by Malgus during the attack on the Jedi Temple.
Although Leneer ultimately failed, the conflict caused Malgus to become disillusioned with the Empire and to kill his lover Eleena Daru, seeing their relationship as a weakness that prevented him from preserving his own power, which he later used to cleanse the Empire of the politicians whom he blamed for allowing the Republic to survive.
During the Cold War years that followed the successful peace negotiations, Malgus led Sith forces into the Unknown Regions, claiming previously-unknown territories for the Empire.
Towards the end of the war, following the presumed death of the Sith Emperor and his service on the Dark Council, Malgus formed his own Empire, free of the infighting of the Dark Council.
However, the Republic and the Sith Empire forces soon teamed up to fight against Malgus' Empire and managed to track him down to his secret base, where they defeated him.
Despite his apparent death, Malgus later resurfaced during the Invasion of Ossus at the start of the Third Galactic War, once again serving as a commander within the Sith Empire.
However, following the Battle of Corellia, Malgus went rogue, determined to expunge all physical and mental restraints used to keep him under control.
Thousands of years after his death, Malgus was still remembered as one of the most powerful Sith Lords to have ever lived.
At one point, Darth Sidious acquired some surviving excerpts of Malgus's journals, which he bounded into his Book of Sith, an anthology of Sith historical writings.

==
In popular culture ==
Prominent Sith Darth Vader and Emperor Palpatine have become iconic villains in popular culture.
Their personae are frequently used as exemplars of Machiavelianism, authoritarianism, brutality and evil in serious, humorous and satirical settings.
Palpatine is archetypal as the "Evil Emperor"—a cunning tyrant who rules through deception, propaganda, fear and oppression.

Although usually considered as a villainous "enforcer" of such power, Darth Vader has also been regarded as a tragic figure and cautionary study in the corruption of a hero who loses sight of the greater good and resorts to evil practices out of fear and desperation.

A "turn to the Dark Side" has become a popular idiom to describe an (often misguided) individual or institution's embrace of evil out of a desire for power.

==
References ==


==
Further reading ==
Book of Sith:
Secrets from the Dark Side (Chronicle Books, © 2013)
ISBN 1-4521-1815-9


==
External links ==

Sith in the StarWars.com Databank
Sith on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
The Sith Explained (Howstuffworks.com)
Who's Who of the Sith on SithOrder.com
Alderaan () is a fictional planet featured in the Star Wars franchise.
It is blue-green in appearance, depicted as a terrestrial planet with humanoid inhabitants, and characterized by a peaceful culture.
It is the home planet of Princess Leia Organa, one of the lead characters in the film series.
In the original 1977 film, Alderaan is destroyed by the Death Star's superlaser.

== Depiction ==
Early drafts of the Star Wars story include references to at least two planets which later evolved into the concept of Alderaan.
Star Wars author George Lucas included a planet called Alderaan in early treatments; in The Star Wars (1973), Alderaan is a city-planet and the capital planet of the galaxy (prefiguring the planet Coruscant which later featured in the films).
The draft script opens with a scene in which an "eerie blue-green" planet called Aquilae is threatened by an armed space fortress.
In Lucas's 1975 draft, Adventures of the Starkiller as taken from the Journal of the Whills, Saga I:
The Star Wars, the capital planet of Alderaan is described as a floating city in the clouds, "suspended in a sea of cirrus methane".
A planet described in Lucas's draft script as being "under siege by the Imperial Legions of Alderaan" and which is later destroyed is named as Ogana Major.
Early sketches commissioned by Lucas from conceptual illustrator Ralph McQuarrie show a design which very closely resembles Cloud City, as featured in the later sequel, The Empire Strikes Back.
In Lucas's third draft, the Imperial City of Alderaan has become the home world of the Sith Lords, and Darth Vader holds Princess Leia captive here.
Lucas continued to hone his script, aided by screenwriters Willard Huyck and Gloria Katz; names of planets and characters were revised and the narrative was improved, and by the fourth draft, scenes on the Imperial capital planet had been moved to a space station called the Death Star and the peaceful world destroyed by the Empire had taken the name Alderaan.
The on-screen depictions of Alderaan in the Star Wars films are scant; the distant planet is seen momentarily in Star Wars (1977) prior to its destruction, and in Revenge of the Sith (2005) a short scene shows a city amid a snow-covered, mountainous landscape.

===
Film ===
Alderaan was originally featured in the first film, Star Wars, released in 1977.
The opening scene depicts the capture of a small spaceship from Alderaan, the Tantive IV, by the Galactic Empire, and introduces the character of Princess Leia Organa, a princess of the Royal House of Alderaan who is played by Carrie Fisher.

Alderaan appears in a later scene in the film, but is only shown on-screen in a distant view from space as the Empire's gigantic space station, the Death Star, moves into orbit around the planet.
The battle station's commander, the Grand Moff Tarkin (Peter Cushing) orders the Death Star's superweapon to be fired at the planet.
Alderaan explodes instantly in a ball of fire.
It is later shown that the shattered planet has been reduced to a cloud of asteroids as the Millennium Falcon spaceship attempts to visit the planet.
The destruction of Alderaan meant that it was not depicted in subsequent Star Wars films until the series of prequel films was produced.
The planet made its first on-screen appearance since 1977 in Episode III: Revenge of the Sith (2005), appearing briefly at the end of the film.
The adoptive father of Princess Leia, Bail Organa (Jimmy Smits) is seen piloting a starship to the planet's surface, which is shown as a mountainous, alpine region covered in snow.
Landing his ship in a citadel among the mountains, he brings the newborn Princess Leia into his royal palace.
The backdrop for these scenes was created by compositing landscape footage of Grindelwald in Switzerland with CGI images of the city.
The planet is not featured in the 2016 film Rogue One, but the character Bail Organa makes an appearance, stating that he will return to Alderaan to wait for his daughter, Leia, to bring the Jedi Master Obi-Wan Kenobi.
This precedes the narrative of the 1977 film, A New Hope.
It is assumed he dies when the Death Star destroys the planet.

===
Television ===
In an episode of the animated television series Star Wars: The Clone Wars entitled "Assassin", Ahsoka Tano has premonitions of Padmé's death on Alderaan.

The mercenary Carasynthia "Cara" Dune, in The Mandalorian, is a former Republican Shock Trooper from Alderaan, according to Moff Gideon, which she later confirms.

===
Comics ===
The comic series
Star Wars: Princess Leia (2015) deals with Princess Leia and Evan (a female rebel pilot also native from Alderaan), rescuing survivors from Alderaan's destruction.
It also features a brief flashback to Leia's childhood on the planet and her relationship with her adoptive father Senator Bail Organa.
In Star Wars #33 (2017), Leia tells Luke that sometimes she can see Alderaan among the stars as, from certain perspectives in the galaxy, its light has not ceased to emit.

===
Legends ===
Alderaan is mentioned frequently and also serves as a location in several works in the Star Wars Expanded Universe, the collection of books, comics and other material considered outside official canon, now branded Star Wars Legends.
In various stories, Alderaan is presented as the home of the characters Tycho Celchu, and of Ulic Qel Droma who fought in the Great Sith War in 4000 BBY.

====
Radio drama ====
The 1981 NPR/BBC  radio drama adaptation of Star Wars features scenes set on Alderaan, in which Princess Leia discusses her mission to acquire the Death Star plans from agents of the Rebel Alliance with her father, Bail Organa (Prestor Organa).
In a later scene, she is confronted by the Imperial commander Lord Tion and accused of treason.
It is established that Alderaan has a strict policy against weapons.

====
Novels ====
In Michael A. Stackpole's 1998 novel, I, Jedi, Alderaan features as the sanctuary of the Caamasi when their home world of Caamas is devastated by the Galactic Empire.

Alderaan is featured in a 1991 role-playing game, Graveyard of Alderaan (part of Star Wars: The Roleplaying Game).
It describes how, after the Clone Wars, Alderaan's massive war machine was dismantled, and the weapons were placed aboard an armory warship called Another Chance.
The ship was programmed to continually jump through hyperspace until called home by the Alderanian Council.
Bill Slavicsek, who wrote the game's sourcebook, later drew from it for his edition of A Guide to the Star Wars Universe.

====
Comics ====
In the Dark Horse comic Dark Empire (1991–1992), New Alderaan is a Rebel Alliance colony planet populated by Alderaanians who were off-world when Alderaan was destroyed.
Mon Mothma's daughter lives there.

== Description ==
In Alan Dean Foster's 1976 novelization of the original film, Alderaan is described as a "small green gem of a world".

The planet appears more substantially in Star Wars reference guides to fictional locations.
According to Kevin J. Anderson's The Illustrated Star Wars Universe (1995) and Wallace, Kolins and McKinney's Star Wars: The Essential Guide to Planets and Moons (1998), Alderaan is covered by wild grasslands, plains, forests and mountain ranges.
The planet has no ocean, but has a semi-frozen polar sea, and thousands of lakes and rivers.
It is rich in biodiversity, populated by a wide variety of flora and fauna, such as the nerf and the thranta.
Human life on the planet is evidenced by a number of cities, built to harmonize with the natural environment such as on canyon walls, on stilts along the shoreline or under the polar ice.
The capital city, Aldera, has been built on a small island in the center of a caldera.
The Alderaanian people value arts and education highly, and place high importance on their participation in the Galactic (later Imperial) Senate and the promotion of peace through demilitarization.
The largely democratic society is formed as hereditary constitutional monarchy, ruled by the King or Queen of Alderaan from the Royal House of Antilles and later, due to marriage, the House of Organa.

The planetary government is the High Council of Alderaan, presided over by a First Chairman and Viceroy.

==
Cultural analysis ==
The destruction of Alderaan is considered by some as an artistic depiction of the danger of nuclear weapons during the Cold War and some claim it is used as a pop-culture example of inadequate political and military action leading to negative effects.

== See also ==
List of Star Wars planets and moons
Star Wars:
The Han Solo Trilogy, Volume 3 – Rebel Dawn
Star Wars: X-Wing, Book 4 –
The Bacta War


==
References ==
Footnotes
Citations


===
Sources ===


==
Further reading ==
Star Wars:
Roleplaying Game – Coruscant and the Core Worlds, hardcover 2003, by Craig R. Carey, Chris Doyle, Jason Fry, Paul Sudlow, John Terra, Daniel Wallace, ISBN 0-7869-2879-4
Windham, Ryder (2015).
Ultimate Star Wars.
DK.
ISBN 9781465436016.

==
External links ==
Alderaan in the StarWars.com Databank
Alderaan on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
A droid is a fictional robot possessing some degree of artificial intelligence in the Star Wars science-fiction franchise.
Coined by special effects artist John Stears, the term is a  clipped form of "android", a word originally reserved for robots designed to look and act like a human.
The word "droid" has been a registered trademark of Lucasfilm Ltd since 1977.

==
Behind the scenes ==
Droids are performed using a variety of methods, including robotics, actors inside costumes (in one case, on stilts), and computer animation.

===
Trademark ===
Lucasfilm registered "droid" as a trademark in 1977.
The term "Droid" has been used by Verizon Wireless under licence from Lucasfilm, for their line of smartphones based on the Android operating system.
Motorola's late-2009 Google Android-based cell phone is called the Droid.
This line of phone has been expanded to include other Android-based phones released under Verizon, including the HTC Droid Eris, the HTC Droid Incredible, Motorola Droid X, Motorola Droid 2, and Motorola Droid Pro.
The term was also used for the Lucasfilm projects
EditDroid, a non-linear editing system, and SoundDroid, an early digital audio workstation.

The name "Omnidroid" was used with permission of Lucasfilm for the 2004 Pixar movie, The Incredibles.

==
Fictional types of droids ==
The franchise, which began with the 1977 film Star Wars, features a variety of droids designed to perform specific functions.

According to background material, most droids lack true sentience and are given processing abilities sufficient only to carry out their assigned function.

However, over time droids may develop sentience on their own as they accumulate experience.

Periodic memory wipes can prevent this from happening, but those who manage to escape this fate will begin to develop their own personalities.
Within the Star Wars universe, a class system is used to categorize different droids depending on their skill-set: first class droids (physical, mathematical and medical sciences), second class droids (engineering and technical sciences), third class droids (social sciences and service functions), fourth class droids (security and military functions), and fifth class droids (menial labor and other non-intelligence functions).

===
Protocol droid ===
A protocol droid specializes in translation, etiquette and cultural customs, and is typically humanoid in appearance.

Protocol droids are used to aid in communications during diplomatic or business negotiations and often function as personal assistants to their owners.

Protocol droids are also used for military service, whether as administrators, couriers or spies.

However, they do have a tendency to be eccentric and fussy.
The most notable example is C-3PO, introduced in Star Wars and featured in all sequels and prequels.
4-LOM is a protocol droid turned bounty hunter who responds to Darth Vader's call to capture the Millennium Falcon in The Empire Strikes Back (1980).
TC-14 is a droid with feminine programming that appears in Star Wars:
Episode
I –
The Phantom Menace (1999), and ME-8D9 is an "ancient protocol droid of unknown manufacture" that resides and works as a translator at Maz Kanata’s castle on Takodana in the 2015 Star Wars:
The Force Awakens.

===
Astromech droid ===
An astromech droid is one of a series of "versatile utility robots generally used for the maintenance and repair of starships and related technology".
These small droids usually possess "a variety of tool-tipped appendages that are stowed in recessed compartments".

On certain spacecraft such as X-wing starfighters, astromech droids also double as the ship's navigational system.

In addition to assisting with piloting and maintenance, astromech droids work in conjunction with the ship's hyperdrive to plot a safe course when traveling at faster-than-light speeds.
R2-D2 is an astromech droid introduced in 1977's Star Wars and featured in all subsequent films.
The malfunctioning droid R5-D4 also makes a brief appearance in Star Wars.
U9-C4 is a timid droid sent on a mission with D-Squad, an all-droid special unit in Star Wars: The Clone Wars, C1-10P is an oft-repaired, "outmoded" astromech who is one of the Star Wars Rebels regular characters, and BB-8 is the astromech droid of X-wing fighter pilot Poe Dameron in The Force Awakens.

===
Battle droid ===
A battle droid is a class of military robot used as an easily controlled alternative to human soldiers, most notably seen in the Star Wars prequel trilogy of films and the Star Wars:
The Clone Wars TV series, in which 'B1' and 'B2' models are frequent antagonists.
Due to their ubiquity, the terms 'B1' and 'battle droid' are used interchangeably; 'B2' models are also referred to as 'super' battle droids.
These droids are mainly used as the primary troops of the Confederacy of Independent Systems or Separatist Alliance, acting as the counterpart to the clone troopers of the Galactic Republic during the Clone Wars.

The tall, thin B1 model resembles the Geonosian species, whose Baktoid Armor Workshop designed and built the droids for the Trade Federation and later the Separatists.

Standing 1.93 m (6 ft 4 in)
tall, B1 battle droids were given a humanoid appearance so they could operate existing machinery and weaponry, and are meant to be cheaply mass-produced in large numbers.

During the Battle of Naboo, battle droids were controlled from a central command computer as a cost-saving measure.

By the time of the Clone Wars, this drawback was rectified by giving them the capacity for limited independent thought.

The B2 super battle droid, introduced in the Battle of Geonosis, was designed by the Techno Union and manufactured by Baktoid as an improvement of the original B1 model.

Heavily armored and capable of limited independent thought, it features an integrated dual laser cannon in its right arm.
B1 battle droids have been criticized for being ineffective and boring opponents in the Star Wars films, easily destroyed and devoid of any personality.

However, Rafael Motamayor of SyFy Wire argues that the 2008 Star Wars: The Clone Wars television series rehabilitated their image by giving them distinct personalities.

With the in-universe explanation that battle droids were upgraded to have independent thought, battle droids in the series are shown with self-awareness of their cannon fodder nature.

This is often used as comic relief as battle droids comment on their tragic situation and even question orders that would get themselves or other battle droids killed.
Beyond the B1 and B2 models, multiple other types of specialized battle droids have been featured in the Star Wars fictional universe.

The droideka is a three-legged heavy infantry unit designed by the Colicoids, a bloodthirsty insect-like species which it resembles.

It is equipped with twin blasters and a deflector shield generator and can transform into its wheel form, allowing the droideka to roll towards the enemy at speeds of up to 75 km/h (47 mph).

Commando droids are superior versions of the B1 battle droid, built sturdier with armor to withstand blaster fire and more advanced combat programming and battlefield awareness.

The T-series tactical droids serve as advisors to Separatist commanders or command groups of other battle droids, while super tactical droids serve as generals of droid armies and fleets.

Droid vehicles and spacecraft include Vulture droids, Dwarf spider droids and Hailfire droids.

After the Clone Wars, the Imperial Senate banned the manufacture of battle droids, but with loopholes for the building of "security" droids.

This includes the Imperial military's KX-series of which K-2SO is an example.

===
Probe droid ===
Probe droids first appear in The Empire Strikes Back as the Empire deploys thousands of them to locate the hidden Rebel base.

They are described as traveling via hyperdrive-equipped pods to almost anywhere in the galaxy in order to search for their target.

Also called probots, they are 2 m (6 ft 7 in) in height, floating above the ground on repulsorlifts and propelled by silenced thrusters.

Probots are equipped with a variety of sensing equipment, including motion detectors and ultraviolet sensors, a blaster for self-defense, and a HoloNet transceiver to transmit any discoveries to Imperial forces.
During the production of The Empire Strikes Back, Joe Johnston drew storyboard panels influenced by Dan O'Bannon and Moebius's short comic "The Long Tomorrow" (1975), one of which repurposes a pose Johnston admitted he borrowed from said work.
The same panel of the comic features a robot design by Moebius, which may have been the basis of the probe droid (or "probot") design that concept designers Johnston and Ralph McQuarrie created for the film.

===
Other droids ===
Labor droids are used for a variety of tasks, from the very simple such as lifting heavy objects to the complex such as repairing machinery or administrating entire facilities, though their programming is very task-specific.

Examples include mining droids which extract valuable resources, often from hazardous environments, and power droids, mobile fusion reactors which recharge ships, machines and other droids.

Interrogation droids utilize a variety of devices, chemicals and techniques to exploit a prisoner's weaknesses in order to extract information from them.

Assassin droids such as the IG-series act with ruthless efficiency to hunt down their targets
; while some serve other masters, others may operate independently.

Medical droids on the other hand work tirelessly to heal people who have been harmed, whether as medical assistants, midwives or doctors.

Many possess an encyclopedic knowledge of different species' physiologies so that patients can be properly diagnosed and treated.

==
List of droid characters ==
==
References ==


==
External links ==
Astromech droid in the StarWars.com
Databank
Protocol droid in the StarWars.com Databank
Astromech droid on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
A lightsaber is a fictional energy sword featured in the Star Wars franchise.
A typical lightsaber is depicted as a luminescent blade of magnetically contained plasma about 3 feet (0.91 m) in length emitted from a metal hilt around 10.5 inches (27 cm) in length.
The lightsaber is the signature weapon of both the Jedi Order and their Sith counterparts (using red bladed sabers), both of whom can use them for melee combat, or to deflect blaster bolts.
Its distinct appearance was created using rotoscoping for the original films, and with digital effects for the prequel and sequel trilogies.
The lightsaber first appeared in the original Star Wars film and has since appeared in most Star Wars movies, with at least one lightsaber duel occurring in each main film installment.
In 2008, a survey of approximately 2,000 film fans found it to be the most popular weapon in film history.
As presented in the films, a lightsaber's energy blade can cut, burn, and melt through most substances with little resistance.
It leaves cauterized wounds in flesh, but can be deflected by another lightsaber blade, or by energy shields.
The blade has even been used as a tool to weld metal.
Other times, the lightsaber has been shown to cause bleeding wounds in the flesh, sometimes accompanied by burns.
Some exotic saber-proof melee weapons have been introduced in the Expanded Universe as well as later episodic films.
An active lightsaber gives off a distinctive hum, which rises in pitch and volume as the blade is moved rapidly through the air.
Bringing the blade into contact with another lightsaber's blade produces a loud crackle.

==
Conceptual origin ==
There are several literary precedents in science fiction for a "sword" of pure energy that can cut through anything, notably:
Edmond Hamilton's story "Kaldar: World of Antares" (published 1933 in the April issue of The Magic Carpet Magazine).
It was reprinted in one of Donald A. Wollheim's well-known and widely read science fiction anthologies, Swordsmen in the Sky, Ace Books 79276, 1964, and thus readily available to the science fiction reader community of the 1960s and 1970s.

Fritz Leiber's Gather Darkness (1943)
: the priests' "rods of wrath" (energy projections) only end where they cut into solid matter, so that a single duel led to numerous casualties of bystanders and charred scores across all nearby walls.

Isaac Asimov's Lucky Starr series (1952):
The force-blade is "a short shaft of stainless steel" which can project a force field that can cut through anything, making it "the most vicious weapon in the galaxy."
Asimov's force-blade expands on his earlier invention of "a penknife with a force-field blade," first used in his Foundation novel (1951).

Gordon R. Dickson's Wolfling (1969): the rod "...
something in appearance like a cross between the flame of a welding torch and the arc of a static electricity charge crackled from the end of the rod ... even as it burst from the end of the rod ...
the discharge from Galyan's rod met the discharge from Slothiel's head on, and the two lines of white fire splashed harmlessly into an aurora of sparks, ...".In
a 1977 interview, Lucas stated "As a kid, I read a lot of science
fiction,...
I was interested in Harry Harrison..." and this issue of Analog ends a Harry Harrison story on the back of the page with a drawing of this duel.

===
Prop construction ===
For the original Star Wars film, the film prop hilts were constructed by John Stears from old Graflex press camera flash battery packs and other pieces of hardware.
The full-sized sword props were designed to appear ignited onscreen, by later creating an "in-camera" glowing effect in post-production.
The blade is a three-sided rod which was coated with a Scotchlite retroreflector array, the same sort used for highway signs.
A lamp was positioned to the side of the taking camera and reflected towards the subject through 45-degree angled glass so that the sword would appear to glow from the camera's point of view.

Set
decorator Roger Christian found the handles for the Graflex Flash Gun in a photography shop in Great Marlborough Street, in London's West End.
He then added cabinet T-track to the handles, securely attaching them with cyanoacrylate glue.
Adding a few "greebles" (surface details), Christian managed to hand-make the first prototype of a lightsaber prop for Luke before production began.
George Lucas decided he wanted to add a clip to the handle, so that Luke could hang it on his belt.
Once Lucas felt the handle was up to his standards, it went to John Stears to create the wooden dowel rod with front-projection paint so that the animators would have a glow of light to enhance later on in post production.
Due to lack of preparation time, Christian's prototype and a second spare were used for the shooting in Tunisia, where filming on Star Wars began.
It was discovered, however, that the glowing effect was greatly dependent on the rod's orientation to the camera, and during the Obi-Wan Kenobi/Darth Vader duel, they could clearly be seen as rods.
Because of this, the glow would be added in post-production through rotoscoping, which also allowed for diffusion to be employed to enhance the glow.
===
Visual effects ===
Korean animator Nelson Shin, who was working for DePatie–
Freleng Enterprises at the time, was asked by his manager if he could animate the lightsaber in the live-action scenes of a film.
After Shin accepted the assignment, the live-action footage was given to him.
He drew the lightsabers with a rotoscope, an animation which was superimposed onto the footage of the physical lightsaber blade prop.
Shin explained to the people from Lucasfilm that since a lightsaber is made of light, the sword should look "a little shaky" like a fluorescent tube.
He suggested inserting one frame that was much lighter than the others while printing the film on an optical printer, making the light seem to vibrate.
Shin also recommended adding a degausser sound on top of the other sounds for the weapon since the sound would be reminiscent of a magnetic field.
The whole process took one week, surprising his company.
Lucasfilm showed Shin the finished product, having followed his suggestions to use an X-Acto knife to give the lightsaber a very sharp look, and to have sound accompany the weapon's movements.

===
Sound ===
The lightsaber sound effect was developed by sound designer Ben Burtt as a combination of the hum of idling interlock motors in aged movie projectors and interference caused by a television set on a shieldless microphone.
Burtt discovered the latter accidentally as he was looking for a buzzing, sparking sound to add to the projector-motor hum.
The pitch changes of lightsaber movement were produced by playing the basic lightsaber tone on a loudspeaker and recording it on a moving microphone, generating Doppler shift to mimic a moving sound source.

== Depiction ==
Lightsabers were present in the earliest drafts as mundane plasma weapons that were used alongside laser guns.
The introduction of the Force in a later revision made the Jedi and the Sith supernaturally skilled; initially they were only portrayed as swordsmen.
The lightsaber became the Force-user's tool, described in A New Hope by Obi-Wan Kenobi as "not as clumsy or random as a blaster.
An elegant weapon, for a more civilized age."
The source of a lightsaber's power is a kyber crystal.
These crystals are also the power source of the Death Star's superlaser.
In films such as Revenge of the Sith and The Last Jedi, melee weapons such as the electrostaff and plasma-lined blades deflect lightsabers.

=== Types ===
Lightsabers are depicted as hand-built as part of a Jedi's or Sith's training regimen.
Each lightsaber is unique, though some may bear resemblance to others, especially if there is a connection between the builders.
The first film appearance of a dual-bladed lightsaber (first depicted in the comic series Tales of the Jedi) was in The Phantom Menace, wielded by Darth Maul.
Being two merged regular lightsabers, the blades are independent of each other and one can be turned on without the other, or can be split into dual lightsabers.
The video game
The Force Unleashed introduced two other variants: a lightsaber pike (a lightsaber with a shorter blade but a long handle, resembling a spear) and a Tonfa-style lightsaber with right-angle hilt.
Count Dooku wields a standard lightsaber with a curved hilt.

The Star Wars expanded universe adds several lightsaber types, including short and dual-phase (adjustable length) weapons.
In Star Wars Rebels, Ezra Bridger's original lightsaber is a hybrid that features a fully functional blaster pistol built into the handle.
Kylo Ren, introduced in The Force Awakens, uses a lightsaber that features two crosshilt blades, giving it the appearance of a greatsword.
His blade also has an unstable, fiery appearance, explained in canon reference books as stemming from a cracked kyber crystal.
The Inquisitors of the Galactic Empire are depicted as wielding a unique variation of a double-bladed saber, mounted on a rotating ring enabling the blades 360 degrees of rotation and short-term flight capability.
More obscure lightsaber variations, such as the "lightwhip", an elongated flexible blade used in a matter akin to a whip, the "lightclub", an enlarged standard lightsaber, and the "shoto", a dramatically smaller variation often paired with a standard sized saber have also made appearances.

===
Colors ===
Lightsabers depicted in the first two released films, A New Hope and The Empire
Strikes Back, had blades that were colored either blue (for the Jedi) or red (for the Sith).
Luke Skywalker's new lightsaber in Return of the Jedi was colored blue during the initial editing of the film, and appears so in both an early movie trailer and the official theatrical posters.
However, it was changed to green in the film's final edit after initial viewings by the filmmakers, who felt that it would better stand out against the blue sky of Tatooine in outdoor scenes, and this color change is also reflected in the film's re-release posters.
Mace Windu's purple-bladed lightsaber, as first seen in Attack of the Clones, was requested by the actor Samuel L. Jackson for two reasons; purple is his favorite color and that the purple blade is one way to make his character stand out among other Jedi.
Jackson is known to frequently request that the characters he plays use an item that is purple in color.
The Clone Wars showed the guardians of the Jedi Temple wielding yellow-bladed lightsabers, and, at the end of The Rise of Skywalker, Rey is shown to have built a gold-bladed lightsaber using part of her staff as the hilt.

As depicted in The Clone Wars and Rebels, the builder of a lightsaber chooses a kyber crystal and meditates with it until the crystal acquires a color.
The color of this crystal becomes the blade's color when installed into a lightsaber hilt.
In the book Star Wars: Ahsoka and the comic series Darth Vader: Dark Lord of the Sith, it is shown that dark side users remove the crystal from a defeated Jedi's lightsaber and concentrate force energy on it to break its connection to the light side, a process known as "bleeding" to create a red crystal.
The process can also be reversed, as shown in Ahsoka, when the titular character does so to a pair of crystals taken from an Inquisitor.
She uses them in the pair of white-bladed lightsabers she builds at the end of the novel.

The Darksaber is a unique lightsaber that has a distinct black blade with a white halo, introduced in Star Wars:
The Clone Wars (2008) and subsequently appearing in Star Wars Rebels, where it is described as an ancient lightsaber created by the first Mandalorian to become a Jedi, and later serves as a symbol of Mandalorian authority.
It subsequently appears briefly in the hands of Moff Gideon in the season one finale of The Mandalorian.
By the end of the second season's finale, it belongs to series protagonist Din Djarin, who bested Gideon for it but does not want it; he wishes to turn it over to Bo-Katan, but as Gideon explains, the Darksaber cannot merely be given, it must be won from a defeated combatant, implying Bo-Katan must defeat Din in battle for it.

Other colors have appeared in various expanded media projects, including many video games where the player can select their character's lightsaber color.

===
Choreography ===
The technical lightsaber choreography for the original Star Wars trilogy was developed by Hollywood sword-master Bob Anderson.
Anderson personally trained Mark Hamill (Luke Skywalker) and, in The Empire
Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi
, performed all the stunts as Darth Vader during the lightsaber duels wearing Vader's costume.
Anderson's role in the trilogy was highlighted in the film Reclaiming the Blade where he shared his experiences as a fencer developing the lightsaber techniques for the three original movies.

The lightsaber duels in the Star Wars prequel trilogy were specifically choreographed by stunt-coordinator Nick Gillard to be miniature "stories".
For these films, Gillard was the primary sword instructor for Liam Neeson (Qui-Gon Jinn), Ewan McGregor (Obi-Wan Kenobi), Ray Park (Darth Maul) and Hayden Christensen (Anakin Skywalker / Darth Vader) among other actors.
His goal in choreographing the action for The Phantom Menace was to create stunts that flow from the story; "You can't just think, 'I'm a stunt coordinator
, I'm going to make a big stunt happen'," Gillard said.
"
It's all about making it tie in nicely with the film so that you don't notice the stunts.
"In
writing the prequel trilogy, George Lucas said he wanted the lightsaber combat to be "reminiscent of what had been done in the previous films but also something that was more energized.
We'd seen old men, young boys, and characters who were half-droid, but we'd never seen a Jedi in his prime.
I wanted to do that with a fight that was faster and more dynamic—and we were able to pull that off.
"According to Gillard, various lightsaber combat styles were devised for the prequels and intended to further characterize their practitioners.

I developed different styles for the characters, and gave each of them a flaw or a bonus.
So with Obi-Wan Kenobi, for instance, he's got a very business-like style—when he was younger he could border on the flashy and might twirl his lightsaber a bit, because he was taught by Qui-Gon.
Qui-Gon was brash, that rubbed off on Obi-Wan and Obi-Wan then taught Anakin, who was way too old to learn anyway...
I think the style really worked well.
The Jedi style of fighting is an amalgamation of all the great swordfighting styles.
Melding them together is the difficult part—to move from a Kendo style to, say, rapier requires a complete change in body and feet movement, and this must look effortless.
The style moves seamlessly between the different disciplines, but remains technically correct throughout.

For The Phantom Menace, Gillard set out certain styles and faults for the saber-wielding characters.
He added that the Jedi's use of such "a short-range weapon" meant "they would have to be very good at it"; combining a variety of disciplines from various sword fighting styles to martial arts "with a touch of tennis and tree chopping", he created the style seen in the Episode I lightsaber battles.
For The Force Awakens, director J. J. Abrams decided to approach the choreography similarly to how it was done in the original trilogy.
Abrams stated that the prequel trilogy choreography was "increasingly spectacular and stylized, almost like dance choreography", but that was not what they really wanted to go for in the new films.
He told Empire magazine, "When you look at Star Wars and Empire, they are very different lightsaber battles, but for me they felt more powerful because they were not quite as slick.
I was hoping to go for something much more primitive, aggressive and rougher, a throwback to the kind of heart-stopping lightsaber fights I remembered being so enthralled by as a kid."
==
Cultural impact ==


===
Merchandise ===
Since the release of the first film, replicas of lightsabers have been a popular piece of Star Wars merchandise, ranging from inexpensive plastic toys to the "Force FX" series from Master Replicas, deluxe replicas which use LED-lighted tubes and sound effects to create a close audio-visual representation of what is seen on screen.

====
Disney Parks ====
Disneyland in California sells lightsaber-themed churros outside its Star Tours attraction.
Disneyland and Disney World (Hollywood Studios) also sell legacy lightsabers which are replicas of the lightsabers seen used by the Jedi and Sith in the movies such as Darth Vader, Obi-Wan Kenobi, Rey Palpatine, Count Dooku, and Kylo Ren.
Disneyland and Hollywood Studios also offer Savi's Workshop, a place where you can build your own lightsaber and choose your own color.
Besides Savi's Workshop, there is another custom lightsaber experience.
The Star Trader at Disneyland offers guests a chance to build their own lightsabers, without first paying 200 dollars for the experience.

===
Attractions ===
The Jedi Training: Trials of the Temple is a live show where children are selected to learn the teachings of the Jedi Knights, the Force, and the basics of Lightsaber combat to become Padawan learners.
The show is present at the Rebels stage next to Star Tours –
The Adventures Continue attraction at Disney's Hollywood Studios and at the Tomorrowland Terrace at Disneyland.

===
Parodies ===
In the 1987 film Spaceballs by Mel Brooks, "the Schwartz" is a play on "the Force", from Star Wars.
The lightsabers emanating from the Schwartz-rings held in front of the crotch are phallic symbols.
The cartoon series Futurama features many lightsaber-style weapons, notably expanding batons used by police.
The batons glow and "whoosh" with a lightsaber's distinctive hum, but merely slap victims when used, as if they are plastic toys.
In Jim Butcher's Dresden Files novel series, medical examiner and Star Wars fan Waldo Butters wields one of the three holy Swords of the Cross, which re-fashions itself into a lightsaber upon accepting him as its owner.
In Yuya Sato's Danganronpa Togami light novel trilogy, main antagonist Orvin Elevator / Kazuya Togami wields a lightsaber, to which they are berated for copyright infringement by Genocider Syo / Genocide Jack.

===
Games ===
With the advent of motion-controlled video games, players were given the opportunity to wield an in-game lightsaber with their own hands.
In the seventh generation of video game consoles, there were several Star Wars video games available on the Wii (Lego Star Wars:
The Complete Saga, Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed, Star Wars:
The Clone Wars – Lightsaber Duels, Star Wars:
The Clone Wars – Republic Heroes and Lego Star Wars III: The Clone Wars) and one on the Xbox 360 (Kinect Star Wars) that utilized motion controls to wield a lightsaber through arm gestures.
Unleashed and Duels, both developed by Krome Studios, have more precise control of the lightsaber, allowing players to swing it in any of five different directions (up, down, left, right or forward) with the Wii Remote, while Kinect takes advantage of the eponymous, camera-based motion controller to grant the player a more fluid, one-to-one control method of swinging the lightsaber.

Prior to the seventh generation, there were also a few earlier Star Wars games that used gesture-based control to simulate lightsaber combat, such as the two bonus levels of the arcade game Star Wars Trilogy, where the player controls Luke Skywalker as he wields his lightsaber against Boba Fett and Darth Vader in Return of the Jedi by pushing a joystick in one of eight directions to follow on-screen offensive and defensive cues, and a TV game released around the release of Revenge of the Sith, titled Star Wars:
Saga Edition – Lightsaber Battle Game, in which the player swings a lightsaber-shaped controller to deflect blaster bolts from infantry (such as battle droids and clone troopers) and duel against characters from across the saga.

By the time Disney purchased Lucasfilm, new technological advances made augmented reality possible, leading to the creation of some more notable motion-controlled lightsaber video games that took advantage of that feature.
One of them came in the form of a special activity mode in the official Star Wars fan app on iOS and Android in which players use their smartphone's motion sensors to practice and master blaster deflection with a training droid (which appears on the phone's rear camera), similar to the deflection training exercises featured aboard the Millennium Falcon in A New Hope, while progressing through the ranks of the Jedi or Sith order.
Another is in Star Wars: Jedi Challenges, which works with a Lenovo Mirage AR headset, a tracking sensor and a dedicated lightsaber controller that launched in December 2017.
One of the multiple game modes available in Challenges, which was jointly developed by Disney and Lenovo, enables players to confront Star Wars villains in lightsaber duels, such as Darth Maul and Kylo Ren.

==
See also ==
List of Star Wars weapons
Physics and Star Wars
Photonic molecule
Star Wars:
Evolution of the Lightsaber Duel


==
References ==
Footnotes
Citations


==
External links ==
Lightsaber in the StarWars.com Databank
Lightsaber on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
"Howstuffworks – Inside the Lightsaber"
Scientists Could Create Real Lightsabers
Senator Bail Prestor Organa of Alderaan is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise.
Mentioned in the first film, A New Hope, and portrayed by Jimmy Smits in the prequel trilogy films Attack of the Clones (2002) and Revenge of the Sith (2005), and the anthology film Rogue One: A Star Wars Story (2016), he is a member of the Galactic Senate representing his home planet of Alderaan in the Galactic Senate, and the adoptive father of Princess Leia Organa.
He also secretly serves as a member of the Rebel Alliance, of which he is a founding member.
Bail and his wife Breha are killed when Alderaan is destroyed by the Death Star in A New Hope.

==
Character ==


=== Creation and development ===
A 1974 script draft of the 1977 film Star Wars by George Lucas has a character named Bail Antilles, a galactic trader who is first introduced on the planet Alderaan.
The name "Bail Antilles" would later be mentioned in The Phantom Menace as one of the candidates running for Supreme Chancellor of the Galactic Republic.

Princess Leia's father, named "Prestor", was introduced in the 1981 Star Wars radio drama and voiced by Stephen Elliott.
The character is named Bail Prestor Organa in the 1997 novel The Paradise Snare by A. C. Crispin.

===
Portrayal ===
Bail was originally portrayed by Adrian Dunbar in a deleted scene in The Phantom Menace, but his scenes were cut.
He was later portrayed by Jimmy Smits in Attack of the Clones, Revenge of the Sith, and Rogue One.
The character is voiced by Phil LaMarr in the 3D CGI animated television series The Clone Wars and Rebels.
Dunbar's likeness would later be used for Senator Bail Antilles.

==
Appearances ==


===
Film ===
Bail does not appear in the original film, Star Wars (1977, later subtitled A New Hope), but he is still an important part of the plot; he is mentioned by Princess Leia within the hologram that she sends to Tatooine hidden within the droid R2-D2.
Within the hologram, Leia asks Jedi Obi-Wan Kenobi to deliver the plans of the planet-destroying Death Star space station, to her and her father Bail's home planet Alderaan.
The Death Star's commander, Grand Moff Tarkin, orders Alderaan destroyed when Leia refuses to tell him the real location of the Rebel base; it is implied that Bail is killed, along with the rest of the planet's population save Leia, when it is destroyed by the Death Star's superlaser.

While Bail is not mentioned directly in Return of the Jedi, the films expands upon some of his backstory from A New Hope, revealing Leia is not Bail's biological daughter.
Her biological father is revealed to be series antagonist Darth Vader, formerly Anakin Skywalker, a fallen Jedi who turned to the dark side of the Force.
Leia's biological mother is mentioned but not given a name, nor a backstory.

Bail does not appear in the sequel trilogy.
However, in The Last Jedi, set 34 years after A New Hope, he is mentioned when R2-D2 replays the hologram from A New Hope in an attempt to convince Luke Skywalker to help Leia and the newly formed Resistance fight the tyrannical First Order.

====
The Phantom Menace ====
Adrian Dunbar was cast as Bail Organa for Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace and appeared in costume in publicity stills, but his scene was ultimately cut.
Dunbar's likeness was retconned into the appearance of the character Bail Antilles.

====
Attack of the Clones ====
Released in 2002, and taking place 22 years before A New Hope, Attack of the Clones features Bail Organa, depicting him as an influential senator of Alderaan.
He participates in a discussion with Jedi Masters Yoda and Mace Windu about the Separatist movement led by Count Dooku.
Chancellor Palpatine of Naboo suggests that Padmé Amidala be put under the protection of the Jedi Obi-Wan Kenobi, who is training young Anakin Skywalker.
After the Battle of Geonosis, Bail meets with Palpatine and other senators as the new army of clone troopers are preparing to fight in the newly declared Clone Wars.

====
Revenge of the Sith ====
In Revenge of the Sith (2005), Bail thanks Obi-Wan and Anakin for defeating Dooku and saving Palpatine in the Battle of Coruscant.
Later, Bail stumbles upon a clone trooper attack on the Jedi Temple, but escapes to warn other Jedi that their order is under attack, saving Yoda and Obi-Wan in the process.
He then goes to the Senate, watching helplessly as Palpatine - who is secretly the Sith Lord Darth Sidious, the mastermind of the war - reforms the Republic into the tyrannical Galactic Empire, with himself as Emperor.
After Yoda fails to kill Palpatine in a duel, Bail helps the Jedi Master escape.
After Padmé dies while giving birth to twins, Bail and his wife, Queen Breha, adopt Padmé's daughter, Leia, to hide the child from her biological father, Anakin, who has become the Sith Lord Darth Vader.

====
Rogue One ====
In the 2016 prequel film Rogue One, set directly before A New Hope, Bail is present at a meeting of the Rebel Alliance on Yavin 4 to discuss the new Imperial superweapon, the Death Star.
Mon Mothma asks Bail to bring Obi-Wan out of hiding on Tatooine, and he decides to assign one of his most trusted agents to the task: his daughter Leia.
He goes to await Leia's arrival on his home planet Alderaan.

====
A New Hope ====
While Bail does not appear onscreen in this film, he has a connection to it.
When the captured Leia lies about the Rebel base being on Dantooine (due to the Empire standing ready to destroy both Alderaan and the Rebel base on Yavin IV), Tarkin did indeed believe her, but he still ordered Alderaan's destruction, resulting in the deaths of Bail and his wife, Breha, along with many others.

===
Television ===


====
The Clone Wars (2008–2020) ====
Bail Organa also appears in the CGI animated series The Clone Wars, voiced by Phil LaMarr.

====
Rebels ====
Bail is voiced by Phil LaMarr in this animated series.
He is made aware of the Rebel cell on Lothal in the 2014 series premiere "Droids in Distress," and later sends a small fleet of frigates to aid in their escape in the season 1 finale, "Fire Across the Galaxy".
He periodically reappears to send supplies and assign missions to the crew of the Ghost.
In the 2017 episode "Twin Suns," it is revealed that though Bail had publicly confirmed Obi-Wan's death, the Jedi is actually alive and in hiding on Tatooine.

===
Video games ===
Bail appears in the 2008 video game
Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed.
He is captured by Maris Brood on the planet of Felucia, after going after Jedi Master Shaak Ti.
Unbeknownst to Bail, Shaak Ti was killed by the Sith assassin, Starkiller, who is Vader's apprentice.
Starkiller eventually rescues Bail as he creates the Rebel Alliance.
Bail is once again voiced by Jimmy Smits.

===
Comics ===
Bail appears briefly in flashbacks in the 2015 Marvel Comics miniseries Princess Leia.
A shapeshifter impersonates him in Marvel's Star Wars #45.
===
Novels ===
Bail appears in the 2017 novel Leia: Princess of Alderaan, in which his daughter Leia discovers that he is secretly involved in a rebellion against the Empire.
He also appears briefly in the 2016 novel Ahsoka.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Bail Organa in the StarWars.com Databank
Bail Organa on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Bail Organa on IMDb
Mos Eisley is a spaceport town in the fictional Star Wars universe.
Located on the planet Tatooine, it first appeared in the 1977 film Star Wars, described by the character Obi-Wan Kenobi (played by Alec Guinness) as a "wretched hive of scum and villainy".

A notable scene set in a seedy Mos Eisley cantina crowded with numerous alien races made a particular impact on audiences.
Location filming for the spaceport took place from 1975–76 in Tunisia, with interiors filmed at Elstree Studios in London.

== Depiction ==


===
Film ===
Mos Eisley made its first appearance in the original 1977 film, Star Wars.
It is depicted as a busy, bustling port city situated in a desert plain, populated with transients of all species.
The lawless spaceport attracts criminals, smugglers and fugitives.
Spacecraft land at docking bays dotted across the city.

The Mos Eisley scenes occur early in Star Wars, when the young hero Luke Skywalker and his mentor Obi-Wan Kenobi travel to the spaceport in search of a pilot, accompanied by the droids, C-3PO and R2-D2.
Obi-Wan warns Luke that the spaceport may be dangerous.
Upon arrival, Luke and Obi-Wan enter the cantina, a dimly-lit tavern patronised by visiting starship pilots.
Strong drink is on sale at the bar and there are frequent outbreaks of violence among the clientele.
The cantina attracts a range of exotic alien species, although droids are not permitted to enter — the bartender orders them to leave, saying "We don't serve their kind in here".
A band of domed-headed aliens plays a set of otherworldly jazz-style music.
Luke is threatened with violence by two of the customers, Ponda Baba, an Aqualish, and Doctor Evazan, a deformed human, but Obi-Wan intervenes with his lightsaber, cutting Ponda's arm off in the fight.
This is the first time a lightsaber is used in combat on-screen in the Star Wars franchise.
Obi-Wan introduces Luke to a pair of smugglers, Chewbacca and Han Solo, and they negotiate terms for passage to the planet Alderaan.
After Luke and Obi-Wan have departed, Han is involved in a brief confrontation with Greedo, a green-skinned gangster; the exchange ends violently when Han shoots Greedo dead.
As the group prepare to leave, they are followed to Docking Bay 94 by Garindan, a spy working for the Empire.
Following a brief gunfight with Imperial stormtroopers, they board the Millennium Falcon spaceship and take off from Tatooine.

===
Books ===
In the novelization of the film, Star Wars: From the Adventures of Luke Skywalker by George Lucas (ghostwritten by Alan Dean Foster), Mos Eisley is described as a haphazard, run-down settlement built of concrete and sandstone, a large part of it built underground to escape the heat of Tatooine's twin suns.
The cantina is described as a dark, sinister bar full of "one-eyed creatures and thousand-eyed, creatures with scales, creatures with fur".
The narrative describes "Tentacles, claws and hands... wrapped around drinking utensils".
The Expanded Universe anthology of intertwined short stories, Tales from the Mos Eisley Cantina, edited by Kevin J. Anderson, explores the cantina and its clientele further.
The book names the establishment as "Chalmun's Cantina", introducing its proprietor as a Wookiee named Chalmun; it also reveals that the bartender is named Wuher.
The book also explores the reasons for the cantina's ban on droids: the bartender claims to dislike everyone, but lashes out at droids because they are the only thing that will not try to fight back; the proprietor Chalmun does not tolerate droids because they do not drink, and therefore occupy valuable space.
The backstory of the cantina's resident swing band is also expanded in the short stories
"We Don't Do Weddings: The Band's Tale" by Kathy Tyers and "Empire Blues" by Daniel Keys Moran.
The band is named as Figrin D'an and the Modal Nodes
and it is revealed that the players belong to a race called Bith.
Their main musical number is also given a title, "Mad About Me".
===
Television ===
Mos Eisley appears in the 2019 Star Wars television series, The Mandalorian.
In "Chapter 5: The Gunslinger", the Mandalorian is forced to set down in Mos Eisley for repairs after a space battle with another bounty hunter.
In order to pay for the repairs, the Mandalorian goes to a local cantina to look for a bounty.
There, he meets a rookie bounty hunter, Toro Calican, who hires him to help locate Fennec Shand, a dangerous mercenary.
The pair locate Shand just beyond the Dune Sea and apprehend her.
However, when the Mandalorian goes to retrieve transport for them, Shand tries to turn Calican against him by telling Calican about the Mandalorian turning against the bounty hunter guild to rescue the child.
Calican kills Shand and decides to capture the Mandalorian and the child and collect all three bounties.
The Mandalorian, however, is able to overcome Calican and rescue the child and Peli, a mechanic that was repairing his ship and watching the child.
The Mandalorian gives Peli the reward for Shand as payment for the repairs and he and the child depart Tatooine.
==
Production
==
===
Filming ===
The first view of Mos Eisley in Star Wars is a shot of Death Valley in California from the Dante's View lookout, with a matte painting added in the distance.
The actual filming on location took place on the Tunisian island of Djerba.

In 1975, during the early stages of production on Star Wars, the appearance of the Mos Eisley cantina and its clientele was realized through the work of concept arts Ron Cobb, Rick Baker and Ralph McQuarrie and costume designer John Mollo.
Mollo worked with George Lucas to compile a chart of visual designs for a range of character types.
In collaboration with Mollo, make-up artist Stuart Freeborn designed the masks and prosthetics to match each of the costumes, along with Doug Beswick, Rick Baker, Phil Tippett, Nick Maley and Christopher Tucker.
Freeborn has remarked that the cantina scene was specifically set up to be a "shock" scene — until this point in the film, there had been few appearances of non-human creatures, and the entrance into the cantina suddenly presented the audience with an array of outlandish species.
Working from Lucas's direction and a maquette, set designer John Barry created the cantina set complete with circular bar and shady alcoves.
Mollo included a few costumes borrowed from Westerns, and based some other costumes on characters from the 1950 film Destination Moon and the 1960s television series Lost in Space.
The alien musicians in the band were played by a number of the Industrial Light & Magic crew, including Phil Tippett, Jon Berg, Rick Baker, who all mimed to the Benny Goodman tune "Sing, Sing, Sing" at George Lucas's suggestion.

The exterior scene was initially filmed in 1976 at the little town of Ajim, which is a fishing port on the Isle of Djerba, Tunisia.
The film crew added some false frontage to the structure, which has seen no refurbishment since 1976.
The local owner was reimbursed eight dollars a day.
The interior set was constructed and filmed on Stage 6, Elstree Studios in London.
Harrison Ford filmed his first scene with Alec Guinness — Ford later remarked that the prospect of working with Guinness "scared the shit out of me".
As filming progressed, Lucas encountered many problems; the production was running over-budget and both cast and crew were suffering health problems.
Stuart Freeborn fell ill and was unable to complete his work on the cantina creature masks.
In early 1977, under pressure to complete his movie (now more than $2 million over budget), Lucas negotiated limited additional funding from 20th Century Fox executives to support second unit filming.
Some of the most important additional footage shot was to enhance the cantina scene at Hollywood Center Studios.
Lucas had been dissatisfied with the make-up in previous shots due to Freeborn's illness, and was now able to fully realize the scene with several close-ups of alien creatures, complete with Freeborn's masks.
Lucas also supplemented the limited coverage he had from the Tunisia footage with footage from Death Valley.
The new material was cut into the film by Lucas's editors, including Lucas's wife Marcia Lucas.
Lucas remained dissatisfied with the final cut of the cantina scene, and when Lucasfilm released the Special Edition of Star Wars in 1997, Lucas made a number of changes to the shots.
In the opening sequence of the cantina scene, a sinister werewolf-type character was replaced by a CGI pipe-smoking reptile.
The second change to the cantina scene was an adjustment to the confrontation between Han Solo and Greedo, which altered the rapid sequence of action so that Greedo is shown to fire the first shot.
This change has proved one of the most controversial among Star Wars fandom, and gave rise to the popular slogan "Han shot first" in objection to the alteration.

===
Music ===
Throughout the cantina scenes in Star Wars, there is constant background music played by an alien band.
This diegetic music was composed for the film by John Williams, and consisted of two pieces written for trumpet, three saxophones, clarinet, Fender Rhodes piano and percussion, along with steel drum and synthesizer.
George Lucas briefed Williams to imagine "several creatures in a future century finding some 1930s
Benny Goodman swing band music ... and
how they might attempt to interpret it".
Williams combined traditional jazz instruments with instruments associated with Afro-Caribbean music in order to create a sound that was "both alien and yet familiar at the same time."
==
Spin-off merchandise ==


===
Toys ===
In 1978 the toy manufacturer Kenner Products released a Cantina Adventure Set as part of its range of Star Wars action figures.
The playset consisted of a miniature plastic bar with a cardboard backdrop depicting various cantina creatures and an Imperial stormtrooper.
A second version of the playset was brought to market in 1979, named the Creature Cantina Action Playset.
In September 2020, LEGO Released a Master Builder Series (MBS) Mos Eisley Cantina (set number: 75290).
It featured 3,187 pieces, 21 Minifigures and cost $349.99 USD/EUR.

===
Music releases ===
The first piece of music from the Cantina scene was released in 1977 on the Star Wars Original Motion Picture Soundtrack, entitled simply "Cantina Band".
Later CD re-releases of the soundtrack album included the second piece, which was titled "Cantina Band #2".
The first "Cantina Band" number has since been retitled "Mad About Me".
That same year, the record producer Meco released a space disco version of the Star Wars title theme and "Cantina Band" on his single "Star Wars Theme/Cantina Band".
Since then, numerous popular cover versions and parodies have been released which feature the "Cantina Band" melody, including "Star Wars Cantina" (1996) by Mark Jonathan Davis, a parody song of Barry Manilow's "Copacabana"; "Cantina Band" (1995) by the rock band Ash, as the B-side of their single "Girl From Mars"; "Digga Digga Doo" (2004) by the Asylum Street Spankers, from their 2004 album Mercurial; 
and "Cantina" (2007) by Voltaire from his album Ooky Spooky;
A bluegrass version of the theme is heard during the bar scene in the 2011 film Paul, recorded by Syd Masters and The Swing Riders.

== See also ==
Djerba
Ajim


==
References ==
Footnotes
Citations


===
Sources ===


==
External links ==
Mos Eisley — Star Wars Databank
Mos Eisley Cantina — Star Wars Databank
Mos Eisley on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki.

Mos Eisley Cantina on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Jabba Desilijic Tiure (colloquial: Jabba the Hutt) is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise created by George Lucas.
Jabba is a large, slug-like alien known as a Hutt who, like many others of his species, operates as a powerful crime lord within the galaxy.
He is notable for never speaking Basic, the main characters' language, though able to understand it, always replying in the constructed language Huttese.

In the original theatrical releases of the original Star Wars trilogy, Jabba the Hutt first appeared in Return of the Jedi (1983).
However, he is mentioned in Star Wars (1977), The Empire Strikes Back (1980) and, indirectly, in Solo: A Star Wars Story (2018), while a previously deleted scene involving Jabba the Hutt was added to the 1997 theatrical re-release and subsequent home media releases of Star Wars.
When first shot, this scene featured Declan Mulholland as a humanoid version of Jabba speaking the main character's language, which was digitally superimposed over with the character's monstrous current design when the footage was reincorporated into the film.
In Star Wars:
Episode I - The Phantom Menace (1999), Jabba appears in a sequence recreated in CGI.

In the storyline context of the original trilogy, Jabba is introduced as the most powerful crime boss on Tatooine, who has placed a bounty on the head of heroic smuggler Han Solo and employs bounty hunters such as Greedo and Boba Fett to capture or kill him.
When confronted at his home palace after managing to capture Solo, Jabba is seen surrounded by a large host of extraterrestrial acquaintances, such as various fellow criminals, entertainers such as the Max Rebo Band, and slave girls, one of which Princess Leia is briefly made before ultimately killing her captor in the midst of a climactic battle sequence.
Jabba is portrayed as a cruel antagonist with a grim sense of humor, an insatiable appetite (as is typical of his species), and affinities for torture and other heinous activities.
The character has incorporated prominently into Star Wars merchandising beginning with the marketing campaign corresponding with the theatrical release of Return of the Jedi.
Besides the canonical films, Jabba the Hutt is additionally featured in various pieces of Star Wars Legends literature.
Since his appearance in Return of the Jedi, Jabba the Hutt's image has been highly influential and recognizable in contemporary popular culture, commonly being used as a satirical literary device or political caricature to underscore negative qualities such as morbid obesity, corruption and corporate greed.

== Appearances ==
Jabba the Hutt appears in three of the nine live-action Star Wars films (The Phantom Menace, A New Hope and Return of the Jedi) and The Clone Wars.
He has a recurring role in Star Wars expanded universe literature and stars in the comic book
anthology Jabba
the Hutt:
The Art of the Deal (1998), a collection of comics originally published in 1995 and 1996.
===
Star Wars films ===
Jabba was first seen in 1983 in Return of the Jedi, the third installment of the original Star Wars trilogy.
Directed by Richard Marquand and written by Lawrence Kasdan and George Lucas, the first act of Return of the Jedi features the attempts of Princess Leia Organa (Carrie Fisher), the Wookiee Chewbacca (Peter Mayhew), and Jedi Knight Luke Skywalker (Mark Hamill) to rescue their friend, Han Solo (Harrison Ford), who had been imprisoned in carbonite in the previous film,
The Empire Strikes Back.
The captured Han is delivered to Jabba by the bounty hunter Boba Fett (Jeremy Bulloch) and placed on display in the crime lord's throne room as a decoration.
Lando Calrissian (Billy Dee Williams), droids C-3PO (Anthony Daniels) and R2-D2 (Kenny Baker), Leia, and Chewbacca infiltrate Jabba's palace to save Han.
Leia is able to free Han from the carbonite, but she is caught and enslaved by the Hutt.
Chained to Jabba, she is forced to wear her iconic metal bikini.
Luke arrives to "bargain for Solo's life", but Jabba rejects his offer and attempts to feed him to his pet rancor, an enormous monster.
Luke kills the rancor, and he, Han, and Chewbacca are condemned to be devoured by the Sarlacc.
At the Great Pit of Carkoon, Luke escapes execution with the help of R2-D2, and defeats Jabba's guards.
During the subsequent confusion, Leia chokes Jabba to death with the chain she was tethered to his throne with.
Luke, Leia, Han, Lando, Chewbacca, C-3PO, and R2-D2 escape, and Jabba's sail barge explodes over the Sarlacc pit in the background.
The second film appearance of Jabba the Hutt was in the Special Edition of Star Wars, which was released in 1997 to commemorate the 20th anniversary of its release.
Here (as in the original version), Han Solo disputes with the alien bounty hunter Greedo (Paul Blake and Maria De Aragon), whom he kills, and Jabba confirms Greedo's last words and demands that Han pay the value of the payload lost by him.
Han promises to compensate Jabba as soon as he receives payment for delivering Obi-Wan Kenobi (Alec Guinness), Luke Skywalker, R2-D2, and C-3PO to Alderaan.
Jabba agrees, but threatens to place a big price on Solo's head if he fails.
This was an unfinished scene of the original 1977 film, in which Jabba was played by Declan Mulholland in human form.
In the 1997 Special Edition version of the film, a CGI rendering of Jabba replaces Mulholland, and his voice is redubbed in the fictional language of Huttese.
Jabba the Hutt made his third film appearance in the 1999 prequel, Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace, set 36 years before Return of the Jedi.
Jabba gives the order to begin a podrace at Mos Espa on Tatooine.
With this done, Jabba falls asleep, and misses the race's conclusion.
Jabba is referred to in the film Solo: A Star Wars Story (2018) by a young Han Solo's (Alden Ehrenreich) mentor Tobias Beckett (Woody Harrelson), who invites Han to join him in working for "big shot gangster" on Tatooine.
At the end of the film, Han and Chewbacca decide to go to Tatooine for this job.

===
The Clone Wars ===
Jabba figures into the plot of the animated film Star Wars:
The Clone Wars, wherein his son Rotta is captured by Separatists (it is later revealed that Ziro, Jabba's uncle, took part in the kidnapping as part of his plan to take full control of the Hutt Clan); Jedi Knight Anakin Skywalker (voiced by Matt Lanter) and his Padawan Ahsoka Tano (voiced by Ashley Eckstein) return him to Jabba in exchange for the safe passage of Republic ships through his territory.
This is backed up by Padme exposing Ziro's crimes to Jabba, who vows to ensure that Ziro will be punished severely.

Jabba subsequently appeared in a handful of episodes of The Clone Wars series, starting in the third season.
In the episode "Sphere of Influence", wherein Jabba is faced by Chairman Papanoida, whose daughters were kidnapped by Greedo, Jabba allows a sample of Greedo's blood to be taken to prove him the kidnapper.
In the episode "Evil Plans", Jabba hires the bounty hunter Cad Bane (voiced by Corey Burton) to bring him plans for the Senate building.
When Bane returns successful, Jabba and the Hutt Council send Bane to free Ziro from prison.
Jabba next makes a short appearance in the episode "Hunt for Ziro" in which he is seen laughing at his uncle's death at the hand of Sy Snootles (voiced by Nika Futterman), and pays her for delivering Ziro's holo-diary.
In the fifth season episode "Eminence", Jabba and the Hutt Council are approached by Shadow Collective leaders Darth Maul (voiced by Sam Witwer), Savage Opress (voiced by Clancy Brown), and Pre Vizsla (voiced by Jon Favreau); when disappointed by these, Jabba sends bounty hunters Embo (voiced by Dave Filoni), Dengar (voiced by Simon Pegg), Sugi (voiced by Anna Graves), and Latts Razzi (voiced by Clare Grant) to capture them.
After a battle, the Shadow Collective confront Jabba at his palace on Tatooine, where Jabba agrees to an alliance.

==
Other appearances ==


===
Expanded Universe ===
The first released appearances of Jabba the Hutt in any visual capacity were in Marvel Comics' adaptation of A New Hope.
In Six Against the Galaxy (1977) by Roy Thomas, What Ever Happened to Jabba the Hut?
(
1979) and
In Mortal Combat (1980), both by Archie Goodwin, Jabba the Hutt (originally spelled Hut) appeared as a tall humanoid with a walrus-like face, a topknot, and a bright uniform.
The official "Jabba" was not yet established as he had yet to be seen.

While awaiting the sequel to Star Wars, Marvel kept the monthly comic going with their own stories, one of which includes Jabba tracking Han Solo and Chewbacca down to an old hideaway they use for smuggling.
However, circumstances force Jabba to lift the bounty on Solo and Chewbacca, thus enabling them to return to Tatooine for an adventure with Luke Skywalker—who has returned to the planet in order to recruit more pilots for the Rebel Alliance.
In the course of another adventure, Solo kills the space pirate Crimson Jack and busts up his operation, which Jabba bankrolled.
Jabba thus renews the reward for Solo's head.
Solo later kills a bounty hunter who tells him why he is hunted once more.
He and Chewbacca return to the Rebels.
(
Solo mentions an incident with a "bounty hunter we ran into on Ord Mantell" in The Empire Strikes Back.)

The Marvel artists based this Jabba on a character later named Mosep Binneed, an alien visible only briefly in the Mos Eisley Cantina scene of A New Hope.
The 1977 mass-market paperback novelization of Lucas's Star Wars script describes Jabba as a "great mobile tub of muscle and suet topped by a shaggy scarred skull", but gives no further detail as to the character's physical appearance or species.
Later Star Wars novels and comics adopt a version of the character's image as seen in the film and greatly elaborate on his background and activities prior to the events of the Star Wars films.
With the 2012 acquisition of Lucasfilm by The Walt Disney Company, all literature in this category was rebranded as Star Wars Legends and designated as non-canonical to any and all new media released after April 2014.Zorba the Hutt's Revenge (1992), a young-adult novel by Paul and Hollace Davids, identifies Jabba's father as another powerful crime lord named Zorba and reveals that Jabba was born 596 years before the events of A New Hope, making him around 600 years old at the time of his death in Return of the Jedi.
Four comics exploring Jabba's backstory were written by Jim Woodring and released by Dark Horse Comics in 1995–96; these were collected as Jabba the Hutt:
The Art of the Deal in 1998.
Ann C. Crispin's novel The Hutt Gambit (1997) explains how Jabba and Han Solo become business associates and portrays the events that lead to a bounty being placed on Han's head.
Tales from Jabba's Palace (1996), a collection of short stories edited by Kevin J. Anderson, pieces together the lives of Jabba the Hutt's various minions in his palace and their relationship to him during the last days of his life.
These stories reveal that very few of the Hutt's servants are loyal to him, with many plans underway among their ranks to attempt his assassination.
When Jabba the Hutt is killed in Return of the Jedi, his surviving former courtiers join forces with his rivals on Tatooine and his family on the Hutt homeworld Nal Hutta make claims to his palace, fortune, and criminal empire.
Timothy Zahn's novel Heir to the Empire (1991) reveals that a smuggler named Talon Karrde eventually replaces Jabba as the "big fish in the pond", and moves the headquarters of the Hutt's criminal empire off of Tatooine.

===
Potential film project ===
Lucas has noted that there was a potential role for Jabba in future Star Wars films.
In August 2017, a Jabba the Hutt anthology film was reportedly in development alongside an Obi-Wan Kenobi film.
Although no cast or crew have been announced, Guillermo del Toro has expressed interest in directing such a project.

== Characterization ==
Jabba the Hutt exemplifies lust, greed, and gluttony.
The character is known throughout the Star Wars universe as a "vile gangster" who amuses himself by torturing and humiliating his subjects and enemies.
He surrounds himself with scantily-clad slave girls of all species, chained to his dais.
The Star Wars Databank remarks that residents of his palace are not safe from his desire to dominate and torture: in Return of the Jedi, the Twi'lek slave dancer Oola is fed to Jabba's pet Rancor.
Jabba the Hutt's physical appearance reinforces his personality as a criminal deviant.
In Return of the Jedi, Han Solo calls Jabba a "slimy piece of worm-ridden filth".
Film critic Roger Ebert described him as "a cross between a toad and the Cheshire Cat."
Curiously, the Russian word for "toad" (жаба / zhaba) sounds very close to "Jabba", while in Arabic حُوت (ḥūt) means "fish / whale".
Science fiction writer Jeanne Cavelos wrote that Jabba deserved the "award for most disgusting alien".
Science fiction authors
Tom and Martha Veitch write that Jabba's body is a "miasmic mass", and that "The Hutt's lardaceous body seemed to periodically release a greasy discharge, sending fresh waves of rotten stench" into the air.
Jabba's appetite is insatiable, and some authors portray him threatening to eat his subordinates.
Among Jabba's only displays of any positive qualities within the franchise occur in Star Wars:
The Clone Wars, where he demonstrates genuine affection for his son Rotta and is worried by his kidnapping and angered by his supposed death.
In one Expanded Universe story, Jabba prevents a Chevin named Ephant Mon from freezing to death on an ice planet; afterward, Ephant Mon becomes one of his most loyal servants.

==
Concept and creation ==


===
Episode IV:
A New Hope ===
The original script to Star Wars describes Jabba as a "fat, slug-like creature with eyes on extended feelers and a huge ugly mouth", but Lucas stated in an interview that the initial character he had in mind was much furrier and resembled a Wookiee.
When filming the scene between Han Solo and Jabba in 1976, Lucas employed Northern Irish actor Declan Mulholland to stand-in for Jabba the Hutt, wearing a shaggy brown costume.
Lucas planned to replace Mulholland in post-production with a stop-motion creature.
The scene was meant to connect Star Wars to Return of the Jedi and explain why Han Solo was imprisoned at the end of The Empire Strikes Back.
Nevertheless, Lucas decided to leave the scene out of the final film on account of budget and time constraints and because he felt that it did not enhance the film's plot.
The scene remained in the novelization, comic book, and radio adaptations of the film.

Lucas revisited the scene in the 1997 Special Edition release of A New Hope, restoring the sequence and replacing Mulholland with a CGI version of Jabba the Hutt and the English dialogue with Huttese, a fictional language created by sound designer Ben Burtt.
Joseph Letteri, the visual effects supervisor for the Special Edition, explained that the ultimate goal of the revised scene was to make it look as if Jabba the Hutt was actually on the set talking to and acting with Harrison Ford and that the crew had merely photographed it.
Letteri stated that the new scene consisted of five shots that took over a year to complete.
The scene was polished further for the 2004 release on DVD, improving Jabba's appearance with advancements in CGI techniques, although neither release looks exactly like the original Jabba the Hutt puppet.
At one point of the original scene, Ford walks behind Mulholland.
This became a problem when adding the CGI Jabba since his tail would be in the way.
The solution was to have Solo step on Jabba's tail, causing him to grunt in pain.
In the 2004 DVD release, Jabba reacts more strongly, winding up as if to punch Han.
In this version, shadows of Han can be seen on Jabba's body to make the CGI more convincing.

Lucas confesses that people were disappointingly upset about the CGI Jabba's appearance, complaining that the character "looked fake".
Lucas dismisses this, stating that whether a character is ultimately portrayed as a puppet or as CGI, it will always be "fake" since the character is ultimately not real.
He says he sees no difference between a puppet made of latex and one generated by a computer.

===
Episode VI:
Return of the Jedi ===
Lucas based the CGI on the character as he originally appeared in Return of the Jedi.
In this film, Jabba the Hutt is an immense, sedentary, slug-like creature designed by Lucas's Industrial Light & Magic Creature Shop.
Design consultant Ralph McQuarrie claimed, "In my sketches Jabba was huge, agile, sort of an apelike figure.
But then the design went into another direction, and Jabba became more like a worm kind of creature."
According to the 1985 documentary From Star Wars to Jedi, Lucas rejected initial designs of the character.
One made Jabba appear too human—almost like a Fu Manchu character—while a second made him look too snail-like.
Lucas finally settled on a design that was a hybrid of the two, drawing for further inspiration on an O'Galop cartoon figure flanking an early depiction of Bibendum (also known as the "Michelin Man").
Return of the Jedi costume designer Nilo Rodis-Jamero commented, My vision of Jabba was literally Orson Welles when he was older.
I saw him as a very refined man.
Most of the villains we like are very smart people.
But Phil Tippett kept imagining him as some kind of slug, almost like in Alice in Wonderland.
At one time he sculpted a creature that looked like a slug that's smoking.
I kept thinking I must be really off, but eventually that's where it led up to."
===
Production and design ===
Designed by visual effects artist Phil Tippett, Jabba the Hutt was inspired by the anatomy of several animal species.
His body structure and reproductive processes were based on annelid worms, hairless animals that have no skeleton and are hermaphroditic.
Jabba's head was modeled after that of a snake, complete with bulbous, slit-pupilled eyes and a mouth that opens wide enough to swallow large prey, even a humanoid.
His skin was given moist, amphibian qualities.
Jabba's design would come to represent almost all members of the Hutt species in subsequent Star Wars fiction.
In Return of the Jedi, Jabba is portrayed by a one-ton puppet that took three months and half a million dollars to construct.
While filming the movie, the puppet had its own makeup artist.
The puppet required three puppeteers to operate, making it one of the largest ever used in a motion picture.
Stuart Freeborn designed the puppet, while John Coppinger sculpted its latex, clay, and foam pieces.
Puppeteers included David Alan Barclay, Toby Philpott, and Mike Edmonds, who were members of Jim Henson's Muppet group.
Barclay operated the right arm and mouth and read the character's English dialogue, while Philpott controlled the left arm, head, and tongue.
The tongue was a light beige color and came out of Jabba’s mouth several times.
When he encountered Leia Organa for the first time and enslaved her, he extended his tongue and licked at her face.
The reason Leia reacted with such disgust upon seeing the tongue, was because in one take, Philpott moved the tongue closer than Carrie Fisher was comfortable with, and it licked her unintentionally.
Edmonds, the shortest of the three men (he also played the Ewok Logray in later scenes) was responsible for the movement of Jabba's tail.
Tony Cox, who also played an Ewok, would assist as well.
The eyes and facial expressions were operated by radio control.

Lucas voiced displeasure in the puppet's appearance and immobility, complaining that the puppet had to be moved around the set to film different scenes.
In the DVD commentary to the Special Edition of Return of the Jedi, Lucas notes that if the technology had been available in 1983, Jabba the Hutt would have been a CGI character similar to the one that appears in the Special Edition scene of A New Hope.
Jabba the Hutt only speaks Huttese on film, but his lines are subtitled in English.
His voice and Huttese-language dialogue were performed by voice actor Larry Ward, whose work is not listed in the end credits.
A heavy, booming quality was given to Ward's voice by pitching it an octave lower than normal and processing it through a subharmonic generator.
A soundtrack of wet, slimy sound effects was recorded to accompany the movement of the puppet's limbs and mouth.
Jabba the Hutt's musical theme throughout the film, composed by John Williams, is played on a tuba.
The theme is very similar to one
Williams wrote for a heavyset character in Fitzwilly (1967), though the theme does not appear on that film's soundtrack album.
Williams later turned the theme into a symphonic piece performed by the Boston Pops Orchestra featuring a tuba solo by Chester Schmitz.
The role of the piece in film and popular culture has become a focus of study by musicologists such as Gerald Sloan, who says Williams' piece "blends the monstrous and the lyrical.
"According
to film historian Laurent Bouzereau, Jabba the Hutt's death in Return of the Jedi was suggested by script writer Lawrence Kasdan.
Lucas decided Leia should strangle him with her slave chain.
He was inspired by a scene from The Godfather (1972) where an obese character named Luca Brasi (Lenny Montana) is garroted by an assassin.

===
Portrayal ===
Jabba the Hutt was played by Declan Mulholland in scenes cut from the 1977 release of Star Wars.
In Mulholland's scenes as Jabba, Jabba is represented as a rotund human dressed in a shaggy fur coat.
George Lucas has stated his intention was to use an alien creature for Jabba, but the special effects technology of the time was not up to the task of replacing Mulholland.
In 1997, the "Special Edition" re-releases restored and altered the original scene to include a computer generated portrayal of Jabba.
In Return of the Jedi, he was played by puppeteers Mike Edmonds, Toby Philpott, David Alan Barclay and voiced by Larry Ward.
Jabba was voiced by an unknown actor in post-1997 editions of Star Wars and in The Phantom Menace.
In The Phantom Menace's end credits, Jabba was jokingly credited as playing himself.
His puppeteers have appeared in the documentaries From Star Wars to Jedi:
The Making of a Saga and Classic Creatures: Return of the Jedi.
David Alan Barclay, who was one of the puppeteers for Jabba in the film, voiced Jabba in the Super NES video game adaptation of Return of the Jedi.
In the radio drama adaption of the original trilogy, Jabba is played by Ed Asner.
In the film Star Wars: The Clone Wars and the following television series, Jabba is portrayed by Kevin Michael Richardson.
All other video game appearances of Jabba were played by Clint Bajakian.
Jabba was supposed to appear in Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed, but was left out due to time constraints.
A cutscene was produced featuring a conversation between Jabba and Juno Eclipse (voiced by Nathalie Cox), which was scrapped from the game.
He appears in the Ultimate Sith Edition.

==
Cultural impact ==
With the premiere of Return of the Jedi in 1983 and the accompanying merchandising campaign, Jabba the Hutt became an icon of not just Star Wars, but American popular culture as a whole.
The character was produced and marketed as a series of action figure play sets by Kenner/Hasbro from 1983 to 2004.
In the 1990s, Jabba the Hutt starred in his own comic book series, Jabba the Hutt: The Art of the Deal (a reference to the book of the same title by Donald Trump).Jabba's role in popular culture extends beyond the Star Wars universe and its fans.
In Mel Brooks' Star Wars spoof film Spaceballs (1987), Jabba the Hutt is parodied as the character Pizza the Hutt, a cheesy blob shaped like a slice of pizza whose name is a double pun on Jabba the Hutt and the restaurant franchise Pizza Hut.
Like Jabba, Pizza the Hutt is a loan shark and mobster.
The character meets his demise at the end of Spaceballs when he becomes "locked in his car and [eats] himself to death.
"The
Smithsonian Institution's National Air and Space Museum in Washington, DC, included a display on Jabba the Hutt in the temporary exhibition
Star Wars:
The Magic of Myth, which closed in 1999.
Jabba's display was called "The Hero's Return," referencing Luke Skywalker's journey toward becoming a Jedi.

===
Mass media ===
Since the release of Return of the Jedi, the name Jabba the Hutt has become synonymous in American mass media with repulsive obesity.
The name is utilized as a literary device—either as a simile or metaphor—to illustrate character flaws.
For example, in Under the Duvet (2001), Marian Keyes references a problem with gluttony when she writes, "wheel out the birthday cake,
I feel a Jabba the Hutt moment coming on.
"
Likewise, in the novel Steps and Exes: A Novel of Family (2000), Laura Kalpakian uses Jabba the Hutt to emphasize the weight of a character's father: "The girls used to call Janice's parents Jabba the Hutt and the Wookiee.
But then Jabba (Janice's father) died, and it didn't seem right to speak of the dead on those terms.
"
In Dan Brown's first novel Digital Fortress, an NSA technician is affectionately nicknamed Jabba the Hutt.

In his book of humor and popular culture
The Dharma of Star Wars (2005), writer Matthew Bortolin attempts to show similarities between Buddhist teachings and aspects of Star Wars fiction.
Bartolin insists that if a person makes decisions that Jabba the Hutt would make, then that person is not practicing the proper spiritual concept of dharma.
Bortolin's book reinforces the idea that Jabba's name is synonymous with negativity:

One way to see if we are practicing right livelihood is to compare our trade with that of Jabba the Hutt.
Jabba has his fat, stubby fingers in many of the pots that led to the dark side.
He dealt largely in illegal "spice" trade—an illicit drug in the Star Wars galaxy.
He also transacts business in the slave trade.
He has many slaves himself, and some he fed to the Rancor, a creature he kept caged and tormented in his dungeon.
Jabba uses deception and violence to maintain his position.

Outside literature, the character's name has become an insulting term of disparagement.
To say that someone "looks like Jabba the Hutt" is commonly understood as a slur to impugn that person's weight or appearance.
The term is often employed by the media as an attack on prominent figures.

In another sense of the term, Jabba the Hutt has come to represent greed and anarchy, especially in the business world.
Jabba the Hutt ranked #4 on the Forbes Fictional 15 list of wealthiest fictional characters in 2008.

Jabba the Hutt has likewise become a popular means of caricature in American politics.
William G. Ouchi uses the term to describe what he sees as the inefficient bureaucracy of the public school system: "With all of these unnecessary layers of organizational fat, school districts have come to resemble Jabba the Hutt—the pirate leader in Star Wars."
== Notes ==


==
References ==


==
Further reading ==
Mangels, Andy.
The Essential Guide to Characters.
New York: Del Rey, 1995.
ISBN 0-345-39535-2.

Reynolds, David West.
Star Wars
Episode
I: The Visual Dictionary.
New York: DK Publishing, 1999.
ISBN 0-7894-4701-0.

Wallace, Daniel and Kay How.
The New Essential Guide to Characters.
New York: Del Rey, 2002.
ISBN 0-345-44900-2.

Wallace, Daniel, and Kevin J. Anderson.
The New Essential Chronology.
New York: Del Rey, 2005.
ISBN 0-345-49053-3.

Wixted, Martin.
Star Wars Galaxy Guide 7:
Mos Eisley.
Honesdale, Penn.:
West End Games, 1993.
ISBN 0-87431
-187-X.


==
External links ==
Jabba the Hutt
in the StarWars.com Databank
Jabba Desilijic Tiure on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Governor Wilhuff Tarkin is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise, debuting as the main antagonist of the film Star Wars Episode IV:
A New Hope, alongside Sith Lord Darth Vader.
He is commander of the Death Star, the Galactic Empire's dwarf planet-sized battle station.

Tarkin advocated for the Tarkin Doctrine, an entirely fear-based military system in which intimidating capital ships and vast numbers of strike fighters are used in huge numbers to make the Galactic Empire seem so impossible to defeat that nobody would ever dare try and rise up against it.
His philosophy of "ruling through fear of force" became central to Imperial policy and promoted him to become the first Grand Moff in the Galactic Empire.
While he is first introduced as a superior officer of Darth Vader, the series also portrays his life prior to the first film, including having known Vader's former Jedi self, Anakin Skywalker, and having been instrumental in the rise of the Empire.
Tarkin has been called "one of the most formidable villains in Star Wars history."
==
Concept and creation ==
Grand Moff Tarkin's character was originally conceived as a holy man from the planet Aquila, but was changed later in the creative process into an antagonist.
As the Emperor would not appear until later in the original trilogy, Lucas used Tarkin's final version as the "main villain" of the first film, a personification of the Empire.
According to a book created to help promote the original film to prospective theaters, he aspires to become the Emperor.

===
Portrayals ===
During the production of Star Wars, Peter Cushing found Tarkin's boots, furnished by the wardrobe department, to be very uncomfortable.
Director George Lucas agreed to limit shots where Cushing's feet would be visible, allowing him to wear slippers.
Cushing admitted many years later to not knowing what a "Grand Moff" actually was, joking that it sounded like "something which infests a clothes closet" and decided to play him as a "deeply cross and unpleasant
gentleman".
In the 2005 prequel film Revenge of the Sith, Wayne Pygram was able to achieve the likeness of a young version of Tarkin through the use of prosthetic makeup.
For his performance as Tarkin in the animated series The Clone Wars, voice actor Stephen Stanton researched Cushing's performances and then tried to imitate what Cushing might have sounded like in his mid-thirties and soften his voice to portray a level of humanity.
In the 2016 anthology film Rogue One, archive footage and a digital scan of Peter Cushing's life mask made for the 1984 film Top Secret!
were used to create a 3D CGI mask which was augmented and mapped to actor Guy Henry's face.
Henry had studied Cushing's mannerisms many years previously for the lead role in British TV show Young Sherlock, but insisted on a screen test as he was not comfortable that his vocal imitation was accurate, stating he sounded more "Peter O'Toole than Peter Cushing".
The ILM team searched through hours of footage to find suitable material of Cushing to build from, footage from A New Hope was lit very differently to the lighting used in Rogue One and had to be digitally changed.
The more they manipulated the lighting to match the other actors in the scenes the less like Cushing the character model looked, which meant creating a balancing act between "a digital figure" and "one who looked precisely like Cushing".
The owners of Cushing's estate were heavily involved with the creation and had input right down to "small, subtle adjustments".
The result, which has been called "one of the most complex and costly CGI re-creations ever", received a mixed response, with questions being raised about the morality of using a dead actor's likeness.

==
Appearances ==


===
Film ===


====
Episode IV:
A New Hope (1977) ====
Introduced in the first film in the original Star Wars trilogy, Grand Moff Tarkin is the Governor of the Imperial Outland Regions, and commander of the Death Star.
After Emperor Palpatine dissolves the Galactic Senate, Tarkin and Darth Vader (portrayed by David Prowse, voiced by James Earl Jones) are charged with pursuing and destroying the Rebel Alliance.
He threatens Princess Leia Organa (Carrie Fisher) with the destruction of her home planet, Alderaan, if Leia does not reveal the location of the Rebel main base of operations.
When Leia names the planet Dantooine as the base's location, he destroys Alderaan regardless, hoping to make an example out of the planet's support of the Rebellion.
Upon learning that Leia's coerced information was false, Tarkin orders Leia's execution.

He allows the Rebels to escape the Death Star with Leia after placing a tracking beacon on the Millennium Falcon in order to find the Rebel base.
He orders the Death Star to destroy the Rebel base on Yavin 4.
In the film's climax, Tarkin refuses to believe that the Death Star is in danger from the Rebel starfighter attack; as a result, he refuses to evacuate due to his arrogance.
He is subsequently killed by Luke Skywalker (Mark Hamill), who succeeds in destroying the Death Star by firing torpedoes into the exhaust port.

====
Episode III: Revenge of the Sith (2005) ====
At the end of Revenge of the Sith, the final film in the Star Wars prequel trilogy, a younger version of Moff Tarkin, played by Wayne Pygram, makes a cameo appearance overseeing the original Death Star's construction, standing beside Darth Vader (Hayden Christensen) and Emperor Palpatine (Ian McDiarmid)


====
Rogue One (2016) ====
In the film Rogue One (which takes place just before the events in A New Hope), Orson Krennic (Ben Mendelsohn), Director of Advanced Weapons Research for the Imperial Military, meets with Tarkin, who expresses his skepticism about Krennic's management of the Death Star project.
Tarkin oversees the Death Star's first attack on the Rebellion when it is used to destroy the Holy City of the planet Jedha.
Impressed, he congratulates Krennic before announcing that he is going to take command of the Death Star from that point on, pointing out security breaches that had occurred under Krennic's command (much to Krennic's chagrin).
Later in the film, Tarkin is informed of a Rebel attack on Scarif, the planet where the plans to the Death Star are kept.
He orders the jump to hyperspace to the planet, where an ongoing battle between the Empire and the Rebel Alliance rages.
Tarkin has the Death Star target and destroy the Scarif base, killing Krennic, Jyn Erso (Felicity Jones), Cassian Andor (Diego Luna), and any other survivor of the ground battle.

===
Television series ===


====
The Clone Wars (2010–2013) ====
In the television series Star Wars:
The Clone Wars, the young version of Tarkin, voiced by Stephen Stanton, appears in the Republic Navy as a Captain and later an Admiral during the Clone Wars.
In the third season, Captain Tarkin and Jedi Master Even Piell (voiced by Blair Bess) are ambushed and attacked by Separatist forces.
Prisoners to the Citadel,
Tarkin and Piell are freed from captivity by a rescue team.
Initially pessimistic about being in enemy territory, Tarkin puts himself at odds with Jedi Knight Anakin Skywalker (voiced by Matt Lanter), but their respective opinions of each other improve when each realizes that both know Supreme Chancellor Palpatine (voiced by Ian Abercrombie).
During a skirmish, Tarkin fights and attempts to execute Citadel Warden Osi Sobeck (voiced by James Arnold Taylor), but fails when Sobeck swiftly retaliates and nearly kills him.
However, Tarkin is rescued just in time by Anakin's Padawan Ahsoka Tano (voiced by Ashley Eckstein).

In the fifth season, Tarkin, now an admiral, suspects Ahsoka of masterminding a terrorist attack on the Jedi Temple, and attempts to have the Padawan arrested.
After Ahsoka is recaptured, Tarkin requests that the Jedi Order expel her and turn her over to the Republic so she can receive more "impartial" judgement.
The Jedi concede and Ahsoka is tried before a jury of senators, with Tarkin heading the prosecution while Padmé Amidala (voiced by Catherine Taber) heads the defense.
Despite Padmé's impressive defense, Tarkin casts doubt by mentioning that Ahsoka had been seen with Dark Jedi Asajj Ventress (voiced by Nika Futterman).
After Tarkin and Padmé's arguments conclude and the jury reaches a verdict that Palpatine is about to read, Anakin arrives with Barriss Offee (voiced by Olivia d'Abo), the real mastermind of the attack.

====
Star Wars Rebels (2014–2018) ====
In the television series Star Wars Rebels, Tarkin (voiced once again by Stanton) starts off as Governor of the Outer Rim territories, including Lothal, but later in the series has the Grand Moff title.
He visits the planet Lothal to deal with its growing Rebel activity, and reprimands Minister Maketh Tua (voiced by Kath Soucie), Agent Kallus (voiced by David Oyelowo), and the Inquisitor for their repeated failures to stop the planet's Rebel cell.
Tarkin has the Inquisitor execute Commandant Aresko and Taskmaster Grint (both voiced by David Shaughnessy) for their inability to deal with the cell's leader, Jedi Master Kanan Jarrus (voiced by Freddie Prinze Jr.).
Later, Tarkin sets a trap for the Rebels and manages to capture Kanan during their mission to send a message through one of the planet's communication towers.
The Rebels' message gets sent out, but Tarkin then orders the tower to be destroyed.
Kanan is tortured by the Inquisitor and transported to the Mustafar system aboard Tarkin's Star Destroyer.
During Kanan's rescue by Rebel forces, Tarkin's Star Destroyer is destroyed, and the Inquisitor is killed.
On Lothal, Tarkin introduces Agent Kallus to Darth Vader (voiced by James Earl Jones).

Taking the loss of his Star Destroyer personally, Tarkin orders that Maketh Tua be brought before him for her failure to find the Lothal rebels.
Knowing the true meaning behind the summoning after the deaths of Aresko and Grint, Tua attempts to defect, but she is killed before she can leave Lothal.
Tarkin later appears in the season three premiere where he meets with Governor Pryce (voiced by Mary Elizabeth Glynn) regarding the Lothal Rebels.
He subsequently grants her request for use of the Seventh Fleet, commanded by Grand Admiral Thrawn (voiced by Lars Mikkelsen).
Tarkin appears via hologram in the season three finale, being briefed on Thrawn's imminent attack on Atollon to stymie a coordinated Rebel attack on Lothal.
Towards the end of season four, he warns Thrawn that he must prove the worth of his TIE Defender program, Thrawn's prototype design of a new Imperial Star Fighter, or it will be shut down in favor of diverting resources to Krennic's "Stardust project" - later known as the Death Star.

====
Star Wars:
The Bad Batch (2020–) ====
Tarkin appears in The Bad Batch trailer released in December of 2020.

===
Novels ===
Tarkin appears in Catalyst: A Rogue One Novel, the prequel novel to Rogue One, where Tarkin forms a rivalry with Advanced Weapons Director Orson Krennic.

====
Tarkin (2014) ====
Star Wars:
Tarkin explores the title character's origins, and chronicles how he meets and aligns himself with Emperor Palpatine and Darth Vader prior to the events of A New Hope.
The novel was one of the first four canon novels to be released in 2014 and 2015.
Tarkin's Star Destroyer, the Executrix, is introduced; it later appears in Rogue One.

===
Legends ===
With the 2012 acquisition of Lucasfilm by The Walt Disney Company, most of the licensed Star Wars novels and comics produced since the originating 1977 film Star Wars were rebranded as Star Wars Legends and declared non-canon to the franchise in April 2014.In
the Star Wars Expanded Universe
, Tarkin appears in Death Star, Cloak of Deception, Rogue Planet and Dark Lord:
The Rise of Darth Vader.
The original Marvel Star Wars comic series features a powerful superweapon called "The Tarkin" after the late Grand Moff.

West End Games' roleplaying material describes the "Tarkin Doctrine", which emphasizes ruling "through the fear of force, rather than force itself", and has been mentioned various other times in the Star Wars canon.
He is also mentioned during the Legacy of the Force novel series as having been present on Zonama Sekot with Anakin Skywalker.
In the comics series Darth Vader and the Lost Command, Tarkin is seen telling Vader of a missing convoy of Imperial craft and adds that his own son was in command of the convoy and is also missing.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Grand Moff Tarkin in the StarWars.com Databank
Grand Moff Tarkin on IMDb
Wilhuff Tarkin on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
TIE fighters are fictional starfighters existing in the Star Wars universe.
Propelled by Twin Ion Engines, TIE fighters are fast, agile, yet fragile starfighters produced by Sienar Fleet Systems for the Galactic Empire.
TIE fighters and other TIE craft appear in Star Wars films, television shows, and throughout the Star Wars expanded universe.
Several TIE fighter replicas and toys, as well as a TIE flight simulator, have been produced and sold by merchandise companies.

==
Origin and design ==
Industrial Light & Magic's (ILM)
Colin Cantwell created the concept model that established the TIE fighter's ball-cockpit and hexagonal panels design for Star Wars (1977).
Star Wars creator George Lucas liked the basic design consisting of two panels connected by a stick with a ball-shaped cockpit, but Cantwell's concept had few details.
Joe Johnston created additional details, such as the cockpit window and the attachment points between the solar panels and the hull.
Initially given a blue color scheme, the TIE fighter models for the first film were grey to better film against a bluescreen; TIE fighters in The Empire Strikes Back (1980) and Return of the Jedi (1983) shifted back to being a muted blue.
Sound designer Ben Burtt created the distinctive TIE fighter sound effect by combining an elephant call with a car driving on wet pavement.
In the book
The Sounds of Star Wars, the engine roar is likened to German Junker Ju 87 "Stuka" bombers, who used sirens to frighten civilians on raids.
This could have been a possible inspiration for the sound.
Combat scenes between TIE fighters and the Millennium Falcon and Rebel Alliance X-wing fighters in Star Wars were meant to be reminiscent of World War II dogfight footage; editors used World War II air combat clips as placeholders while Industrial Light & Magic completed the movie's special effects.
Darth Vader's distinct TIE Advanced x1 in Star Wars was designed to make it instantly recognizable, and the TIE Interceptors developed for Jedi were designed to look fast, deadly, sleek and frightening.
The Jedi starfighter, created for Revenge of the Sith (2005), was designed to bridge the appearance of the Jedi starfighter in Attack of the Clones (2002) and the TIE fighter design from the original trilogy.
The V-wing starfighter, seen at the end of Revenge of the Sith, also makes the distinctive TIE fighter sound when flying by a Star Destroyer.
Dark Horse Comics' Sean Cooke designed the TIE predator for Star Wars: Legacy (2006), set 130 years after the events of Star Wars, to appear both reminiscent of and more advanced than the original TIE fighter.
Designers for The Force Awakens (2015) had numerous discussions about how much to "update" the TIE fighter for the first sequel film set 30 years after Return of the Jedi.
They retained the starfighter's design but altered its aesthetic to suggest improvements to the vessel's manufacturing process and materials.

== Depiction ==
Star Wars literature states that Grand Moff Tarkin commissioned Sienar Fleet Systems to design and manufacture the Twin Ion Engine line edition (TIE/ln) space superiority starfighter and most TIE variants.
Tarkin specified that the TIE had to be fast, maneuverable, energy-efficient, and inexpensive; simply put they are meant to be easily mass-produced and engage in swarm tactics, with the expectation of being expendable assets that would be lost in combat.

To meet these requirements, Sienar incorporated aspects of the V-wing and Jedi interceptor into the new starfighter.
TIE fighters have two hexagonal wings fitted with solar panels which power a twin ion engine (TIE) system that accelerates ionized gases at a substantial fraction of lightspeed along almost any vector, affording the ships tremendous speed and maneuverability albeit with limited fuel reserves.

These wings are also structurally sound enough to double as landing gear and feature repulsorlifts for take-off and landing, though TIE fighters are designed to be launched and recovered by cycling storage racks utilized by Imperial starships and garrisons.

The TIE fighter's primary weapons are a pair of laser cannons tied to a secondary generator and mated with an advanced targeting computer which assists the pilot in hitting other fast-moving starfighters.

The fighter does not possess deflector shields, and while its light armoring is proof against small arms and glancing micrometeoroids a direct hit from a laser cannon will destroy it, encouraging pilots to shoot first and make their shots count.

The TIE fighter also lacks a hyperdrive, not only to save on weight and cost but to discourage defection.

The TIE fighter's cockpit is not pressurized and doesn't contain life-support systems, though when sealed it will retain whatever atmosphere is already in there, requiring pilots to wear flight suits.

TIE fighters are equipped with ejection seats, though in older Legends sources there was disagreement on this issue.
Star Wars literature also holds that TIE fighter pilots are considered an elite group within the Imperial Navy, relying on their quick reflexes and fearlessness to survive multiple tours of duty.

Training involves hundreds of flight hours learning to coordinate as a team and intense psychological conditioning to put the accomplishment of their mission above other considerations.

As such most TIE fighter pilots have a life expectancy of less than a year.

TIE fighter pilots wear self-contained flight suits with life-support systems connected to reinforced vacuum-sealed flight helmets.

These helmets feature ship-linked communications and displays.

===
TIE variants ===
In addition to the standard TIE/ln fighter (also available as the TIE Light Duty training craft, as seen in the Jump to Lightspeed expansion pack to Star Wars Galaxies), a variety of other TIE craft appear throughout the films.

In Star Wars Film and TelevisionTIE Advanced x1: Darth Vader flies a TIE Advanced x1 (or just "TIE/x1") in many media, most notably in the original Star Wars during the climatic Death Star battle.

According to background material, the limited-run TIE Advanced x1 was designed to Vader's personal specifications and was only flown by himself and select Imperial pilots.

Compared to the TIE fighter it is faster and more maneuverable with greater structural integrity, equipped with a deflector shield, hyperdrive, reinforced armor-plated hull and improved SFS L-s9.3 laser cannons.

The "bent-wing" configuration was intended to improve energy collection while maintaining the same speed and maneuverability.

TIE/sa Bomber:
Introduced in The Empire Strikes Back, TIE/sa bombers are seen bombing asteroids in the hunt for the Millennium Falcon.

The design stems from an unused "TIE boarding craft" concept originally developed for A New Hope.
The TIE bomber's double-hull design led ILM's modelmakers to dub the ship a "double chili dog" fighter.

The TIE/sa, or TIE Surface Assault Bomber, was designed within the Star Wars universe for the Imperial Navy to conduct surgical strikes against targets in space or on planetary surfaces.

It features two cylindrical pods: the starboard-side pod housing the pilot in a pressurized cockpit with a pair of L-s1 laser cannons, and a port-side pod carrying two bomb bays that can launch a variety of ordnance including missiles, bombs and orbital mines.

Its "bent-wing" configuration increased the energy-collection surface area to match the bomber's power requirements while a reinforced hull allowed the bomber survive back-blast during atmospheric bombing.

TIE/sh Shuttle:
Also featured in The Empire Strikes Back, a TIE/sh shuttle is seen ferrying Captain Needa (Michael Culver) to Darth Vader's Super Star Destroyer.

Like the TIE/sa bomber, this shuttle design stems from an unused "TIE boarding craft" concept developed for A New Hope.

Known also within the setting as the TIE Command Shuttle, the craft was based on the TIE/sa bomber but replaced the bombardier pod with a luxurious cabin suitable for Imperial dignitaries and naval officers.

In the event the vessel is attacked, the TIE shuttle carries a pair of laser cannons and deflector shields.

TIE/in Interceptor:  TIE/in interceptors —
faster TIE fighters with dagger-shaped wings in the forward profile of those of the TIE Advanced and four laser cannons — appear at various points in Return of the Jedi.
Two scales of TIE interceptor models were used during filming.

Their in-universe origin was to meet the Empire's requirement for a fighter superior to the Rebellion's X-wing and Y-wing fleet when it was determined a full production run of the TIE Advanced x1 would be too expensive.

Faster and more maneuverable than a standard TIE fighter, these interceptors are also better armed with wingtip-mounted L-s9.3 laser cannons with the option to carry two more under the cockpit.

TIE Advanced v1:
Meant to appear as the prototype precursor to Vader's TIE Advanced x1, the TIE Advanced v1 featured in Star Wars Rebels as craft piloted by the Empire's Inquisitors.

The v1's variable-geometry wings, like Darth Maul's shuttle Scimitar's, were inspired by Ralph McQuarrie's original sketches for the x1.

The fighters' fictional origin is inspired by the Jedi interceptor flown during the Clone Wars, as seen by its heavily-armored wings that fold inward.

With laser cannons and ion engines more powerful than the TIE fighter, the TIE
Advanced v1 also features a projectile launcher with a 20 missile magazine, deflector shields and pressurized cockpit.

TIE/d Defender:
The TIE/d Defender made its television debut in Star Wars Rebels, although it first appeared in the 1994 space flight simulator Star Wars: TIE Fighter as player-pilotable craft.

In the previous Star Wars Legends continuity, the TIE Defender was originally designed by Admiral Zaarin, who in the 1994 game would betray the Empire and have to be defeated by the player character.

Its background was later changed in Star Wars Rebels to being designed personally by Grand Admiral Thrawn.

Classified as a fighter-bomber, its unique tri-wing design gives it better visibility than a TIE interceptor while making it faster than all previous TIE models.

Each wing is equipped with maneuvering jets and a pair of L-s9.3 laser cannons, with another pair and twin projectile launchers fitted on the cockpit pod.

The TIE/d Defender also carries deflector shields and a hyperdrive.

TIE/sk x1 Striker:
The TIE/sk x1 experimental air superiority fighter, also known as the TIE Striker, made its first appearance in Rogue One defending the Imperial base on Scarif.

Background material on the model describes how it was specifically designed for atmospheric patrols of Imperial ground installations because of the standard TIE fighter's disadvantage in atmospheric combat.

With its more aerodynamic design and specialized repulsorlift engines, the TIE Striker can fly faster than a TIE fighter or X-wing in an atmosphere and is heavily armed with four L-s9.3 laser cannons, two H-s1 heavy laser cannons, and a bomb bay.

Its spacious cockpit can hold a pilot and an optional gunner/bombardier.

TIE/
rp Reaper
: The TIE/rp Reaper Attack Lander also made its first appearance in Rogue One as support craft with a larger, more angular design that replaces the spherical cockpit found on most TIE fighters.

Within the Star Wars universe, these craft were based on the TIE/sk x1 Striker with similar wing configuration but much larger in order to carry elite Imperial troops into battle.

The TIE/rp Reaper features armor plating, deflector shields and electronic countermeasures to ensure it can survive hostile airspace to deliver its cargo.

It also carries a hyperdrive for faster-than-light travel and a pair of L-s9.3 laser cannons.

TIE Boarding Craft:
The TIE Boarding Craft made its theatrical appearance in Rogue One.

The design was originally set to appear in the original Star Wars but was cut from the film and used as inspiration for the TIE bomber and TIE shuttle.

Background literature states that the TIE Boarding Craft shared many of the same features as the TIE bomber but with seating for twelve passengers and a boarding hatch equipped with laser cutters.

Other equipment included deflector shields, twin L-s1 laser cannons, twin H-s1 heavy laser cannons and missile launcher.

TIE/rb Heavy Starfighter:
The TIE/rb, known also as the TIE Brute, first appeared in Solo: A Star Wars Story chasing the Millennium Falcon during the Kessel Run scene.

Star Wars literature states that the TIE/rb was commissioned to help deal with pirates, smugglers and other outlaws operating in the Outer Rim.

Larger than a standard TIE fighter, the TIE/rb features heavier armor plating and carries a pair of H-s9.3 laser cannons - nearly twice as powerful as a TIE fighter's cannons - on a separate artillery pod.

Because it was sluggish to fly, the TIE Brute features an integrated droid intelligence to assist the pilot.

TIE/fo space superiority fighter:
The Force Awakens features the First Order TIE/fo space superiority fighter, which is superficially similar to the Empire's original TIE fighter but with several technological upgrades.

Built by Sienar-Jaemus Fleet Systems, it features superior firepower, speed and maneuverability with a pair of SJSF L-s9.6 laser cannons and twin SJFS P-s6 ion engines aided by superior solar cell wings and higher-capacity energy converters.

Perhaps the biggest difference is the fact that the TIE/fo features deflector shields - a recognition by the First Order that compared to the Galactic Empire
it must take measures to safeguard its more limited supply of pilots.

TIE/sf space superiority fighter: Also featured in The Force Awakens is the TIE/sf fighter, one of which is stolen by Poe Dameron (Oscar Isaac) and Finn (John Boyega) as they escape the First Order.

Piloted by members of the First Order Special Forces, this model is superior to the First Order's TIE/fo.

It is equipped with a hyperdrive, superior shielding, twin ion reactors, a pair of forward-facing L-s9.6 laser cannons, an aft Lb-14 dual heavy laser turret with full 360-degree rotation, and a missile/mag-pulse launcher.

TIE/vn Silencer:
First appearing in Star Wars:
The Last Jedi, the TIE/vn Silencer is the Interceptor-winged personal starfighter of Kylo Ren.

TIE/wi Whisper:
Kylo Ren flies a custom-model TIE/wi fighter in The Rise of Skywalker.

TIE/dg Dagger: Also known as the Sith TIE fighter, the TIE Dagger featured in The Rise of Skywalker as a red triangular-wing model of TIE fighter forged in secret for forces operating under the reborn Emperor Palpatine.
In Star Wars Legends continuityA number of different TIE designs made their appearance in what is now considered Star Wars Legends, a separate continuity that was split off after Disney acquired the Star Wars franchise.

The TIE/sa was the inspiration for the triple-hulled TIE lander, featured in Star Wars #60 and in Star Wars: Complete Locations.
Red-modified TIE interceptors are also used by the Emperor's Royal Guards, as featured in Rage of the Wookiees, another expansion of Star Wars Galaxies.

Additionally, LucasArts Star Wars video games introduce several TIE variants, such as the TIE Hunter starfighter in Rogue Squadron III and the TIE Mauler surface vehicle in Empire at War.
The TIE/ad fighter  (nicknamed "TIE Advanced" or "Avenger" in-game and derived from Vader's TIE Advanced x1 fighter) and TIE/D Defender — heavily upgraded derivatives of previous craft seen in the Star Wars universe — first appear in TIE Fighter as player-pilotable craft.
The plot of Rebel Assault II revolves around destroying the Empire's ability to manufacture the cloaking TIE Phantom starfighter, and a campaign in X-Wing Alliance centers on destroying experimental remote-controlled TIE fighters.

Star Wars literature also introduces TIE varieties.
TIE raptors attack Rogue Squadron in Solo Command.
TYE wings — TIE fighter and Y-wing hybrids — appear both in I, Jedi and Rogue Squadron: Masquerade.
Dark Horse's Dark Empire introduces both the droid-piloted TIE/D and the TIE crawler "century tank".
West End Games' roleplaying sourcebooks introduce varieties that include the TIE/fc fire-control support ship, the TIE/gt ground-attack fighter, the TIE/rc reconnaissance vessel, and the TIE scout.

==
Cultural impact ==
A TIE fighter model used in filming the climax of Star Wars sold at auction for $350,000, and another TIE fighter from the film sold at auction for $402,500.
Fans built a 16-foot-by-20-foot, 1,000-pound TIE fighter float to commemorate Star Wars' thirtieth anniversary as part of the 2007 Gala Parade in Crystal Lake, Illinois.
A Wired editor's creation of a TIE fighter model out of Starbucks cups and stirrers prompted the magazine to create a contest for its readers to submit their own art out of similar Starbucks material.

io9 mocked the variety of TIE fighters in the franchise, listing four TIE models on its list of the eleven "silliest" Star Wars ships.
Kenner released TIE fighter and TIE interceptor toys during the original Star Wars trilogy's theatrical release, and Kenner's die-cast TIE bomber is a rare collector's item.
Hasbro also released TIE fighter, TIE bomber, and TIE interceptor toys.
Both Kenner and Hasbro also manufactured TIE fighter pilot action figures.
Lego manufactured TIE fighter, TIE bomber, TIE interceptor, TIE defender, and TIE advanced models.
Decipher and Wizards of the Coast published various TIE starfighter and TIE-related cards for the Star Wars Customizable Card Game and Star Wars Trading Card Game, respectively.
In 2012, Fantasy Flight Games released Star Wars: X-Wing Miniatures Game, a miniatures game with pre-painted and to scale miniature X-wings and TIE fighters.
In 1994, LucasArts released the TIE Fighter flight simulator, which casts the player as an Imperial pilot flying a variety of TIE starfighters.
TIE starfighters and their variants are also playable in third- or first-person perspectives in several Star Wars titles.
In 2018, a number of Star Wars starfighters had their aerodynamic abilities tested using the Autodesk Flow Design virtual wind tunnel program.

Of those studied, the TIE Fighter scored the worst with a drag coefficient of .98, which is only slightly better than a brick.

The TIE interceptor was slightly better with a coefficient of .78, while the TIE Striker had the best at .48, though this did not compare favorably to the .02 drag coefficient of an F-4E Phantom.

These poor results were rationalized with the in-universe explanations that drag coefficient plays no role in space travel, and that Star Wars fighters can use repulsorlifts and deflector shields to give themselves better flight profiles.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
TIE Fighter in the StarWars.com Databank
TIE Series on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Yavin (also known as "Yavin Prime", to distinguish it from its moons) is a fictional planet in the Star Wars galaxy.
It first appeared in the 1977 film Star Wars and is depicted as a large red gas giant with an extensive satellite system of moons.
The hidden military base of the Rebel Alliance is located on its fourth moon, Yavin 4.

The climactic space battle at the end of the film, in which the Rebel Alliance destroys the Death Star, takes place in orbit around the planet Yavin.
In Star Wars fandom and the Star Wars expanded universe, this event is especially significant as it is one method used to mark an epoch in the fictional Star Wars universe.
Events in the Star Wars Legends continuity are typically dated in terms of years
BBY ("Before the Battle of Yavin") or ABY ("After the Battle of Yavin").
== Depiction ==
In early drafts of the Star Wars story, author George Lucas began inventing names of characters and planets and assigning roles and characteristics.
In The Star Wars (1973), Yavin is described as a jungle planet inhabited by eight-foot-tall Wookiees.
(
This concept was eventually altered, although the setting of a Wookiee home planet re-emerged later as the planet Kashyyyk, as seen in the 2005 film Star Wars:
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith.)

In Lucas's 1975 second draft, The Adventures of the Starkiller Episode
I:
The Star Wars, the story's heroes land on Yavin in escape pods and are attacked by insect creatures.
They find the Rebel Massassi Outpost and meet characters such as Bail Antilles and General Dodonna, and the Rebel commander is the Grand Moff Tarkin.
It is here that Luke Skywalker ends his quest by being reunited with his aged father.
In later revisions of the story, Tarkin becomes an Imperial officer and Luke's father is removed from the action—he later re-emerges in The Empire Strikes
Back (1980)
as the hidden identity of the main antagonist, Darth Vader.
In the fourth draft (1976), Lucas added a scene in which Luke is also reunited on Yavin with his childhood friend, Biggs Darklighter, a scene which was actually shot but subsequently deleted from the final cut of Star Wars.
The scene was re-inserted in the 1997 Star Wars Trilogy Special Edition.
The closing scene of a victorious award ceremony appears in early drafts, but it is originally set on a gaseous cloud planet called Ophuchi.
According to Lucasfilm's Star Wars Story Group executive Leland Chee, "Yavin 4" ("Yavin Four" in dialogue) is the correct spelling, not "Yavin IV".

===
Film ===
The planet Yavin made its first appearance in the original 1977 Star Wars film.
The planet is shown in space during the approach of the Millennium Falcon spaceship as a large red gas giant planet; orbiting this planet, Yavin 4, the fourth moon, appears on screen as a green/blue-colored Earth-like world.
Scenes showing the Rebel Base are all set on this Moon, which is covered in dense, mist-covered jungles.
The Rebel Alliance has established its base hidden in a complex of ancient temple ruins, known as the Massassi ruins.
Tall observation towers stand above the treetops to monitor entries and exits from the base.
Once discovered by the Galactic Empire, the Yavin Base is threatened by the Death Star, the Empire's giant space station which has the capability of destroying entire planets.
The Rebellion launches an attack on the Death Star with X-wing and Y-wing starfighters; with seconds remaining before the Yavin moon is to be destroyed, Luke Skywalker launches proton torpedoes and successfully destroys the Death Star.
The film concludes with a triumphant award ceremony on Yavin in which the heroes are decorated for their bravery.
This battle has become known as the Battle of Yavin, and its date is used as a place-marker for events in the expanded Star Wars universe.
Events before the Battle of Yavin are marked by BBY ("Before the Battle of Yavin"), and events that occur after are marked by ABY ("After the Battle of Yavin").

After the events of Episode IV:
A New Hope, the Rebellion abandons the moon to seek sanctuary elsewhere.
However, Yavin base features once again in the 2016 standalone film, Rogue One.
Set a short time before Episode IV, Rogue One follows the story of a young outlaw called Jyn Erso who becomes involved with the Rebels.
Erso is brought to the base on Yavin 4 and several scenes in the base depict characters who originally appeared in earlier Star Wars films, including Senator Mon Mothma, Bail Organa and General Dodonna.
Erso argues with the Rebel leadership on Yavin 4 about a planned attack on an Imperial base to steal the schematics of the Death Star.
Defying their decision against the operation, Erso joins a task force to steal the Death Star plans, thus setting in motion the events that lead up to Episode IV.

====
Filming locations ====
As with other fictional Star Wars settings, several real-world filming locations have been used to create the Yavin Moon location.
For the original 1977 film, Guatemala was chosen for second unit filming to create establishing shots for the Yavin base, and in March 1977, a crew led by Richard Edlund travelled to Guatemala.
The exterior panoramic shots featuring the scenery of Yavin 4 were filmed overlooking the ancient Mayan pyramid complex of Tikal amid a dense rainforest.
The Rebel outlook post was built from trash cans glued together and mounted on a pole; the special effects artist Lorne Peterson was persuaded to climb into the precarious structure to pose in Rebel uniform for the shot.
The Rebel hangar scenes were shot inside a pair of disused WWII airship sheds at RAF Cardington in England.
Shed 1 served as the Rebel hangar in Episode IV.
The exterior of the hangar entrance was shot at Cardington through a matte painting of a temple structure.
When film crews returned to Cardington in 2015 to shoot Rogue One, they used Shed 2.
===
Other media ===
Yavin 4 is featured in the 2015 comic book miniseries Star Wars: Shattered Empire as the home of Shara Bey and Kes Dameron, the parents of Poe Dameron.
Oscar Isaac, who portrays Poe Dameron in the Star Wars sequel trilogy, specifically requested that Yavin 4 be his character's homeworld after learning that scenes set on the moon were filmed in his home country, Guatemala.

====
Star Wars Legends ====
With the 2012 acquisition of Lucasfilm by The Walt Disney Company, most of the licensed Star Wars novels and comics produced since the originating 1977 film Star Wars were rebranded as Star Wars Legends and declared non-canon to the franchise in April 2014.In Legends continuity, the giant temples on the Yavin 4 moon are said to have been built ages ago by the Massassi to worship Naga Sadow, a Sith Lord who had enslaved and mutated the Massassi using Sith Alchemy.
In the comic book series Tales of the Jedi, it is stated that Yavin 4 was where Naga Sadow hid from the Republic in 5,000 BBY and was discovered several hundred years later by the fallen Jedi Freedon Nadd.
According to the comic series, the Massassi warriors who built the ruins used by the Rebels were brought to the planet by the Sith Order in its early years.
In the 1994 Jedi Academy trilogy books, Kevin J. Anderson suggested that Jedi Knight Exar Kun had the temples built.
Enveloped in the dark side, Kun elevated himself to the stature of a god.
He enslaved the Massassi and forced them to construct an intricate complex of massive temples that were used for arcane Sith ceremonies and rites as focus for the dark side.
In the same series, Yavin 4 was the base of Jedi Master Luke Skywalker's Jedi Praxeum, where he personally trained the next generation of Jedi Knights.
Once Skywalker had trained enough Jedi, this duty was taken up by the married Jedi Masters, Battlemaster Kam Solusar and his wife Chief Librarian Tionne Solusar, as well as another former apprentice of Skywalker's, Streen.
The Praxeum was destroyed by the Yuuzhan Vong, during their invasion of the moon in 26 ABY.
The Praxeum was eventually relocated to the ancient Jedi homeworld, Ossus.
The original Praxeum was the main setting of the Young Jedi Knights series, based on Skywalker's teenage niece and nephew, Jaina and Jacen Solo.
In the young reader novel The Lost City of the Jedi, it is discovered, as the title suggests, that the ancient Jedi built a lost city on Yavin
4.In
the animated micro-series Star Wars:
Clone Wars, Yavin 4 was the site where Anakin Skywalker had a fierce battle with Asajj Ventress, a follower of Count Dooku.
Anakin defeated Asajj, sending her falling down a dark abyss.
In Star Wars video games, Yavin 4 appears in the downloadable content for the video game
Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic.
Yavin 4 has also been added in the latest expansion (December 2014) of the MMORPG Star Wars: The Old Republic.
Titled "Shadow of Revan", the expansion establishes a connection with the previous game.
The Super Star Destroyer Knight Hammer was destroyed here when it was diverted towards the planet's core after a collision with a Rebel vessel.

== See also ==
List of Star Wars planets and moons


==
References ==
Footnotes
Citations


===
Sources ===
Rinzler, J. W. (2008).
The Making of Star Wars: The Definitive Story Behind the Original Film.
Ebury Press.
ISBN 9780091924997.
Retrieved 20 April 2017.

Bouzereau, Laurent (1998).
Star Wars: the Annotated Screenplays (1st UK ed.).
London: Titan Books.
ISBN 9781852869236.
Retrieved 21 April 2017.

Wallace, Daniel; Kolins, Scott; McKinney, Brandon (1998).
Star Wars : the Essential Guide to Planets and Moons
(1st ed.).
New York:
Ballantine Pub.
Group.
ISBN 9780345420688.

==
External links ==
Yavin Prime on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Yavin 4 on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Yavin 13 on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Naboo is a fictional planet in the Star Wars universe.
A bountiful world with a mostly green terrain, the planet was the homeworld of two independent societies:
the native Gungans, who dwelt in underwater cities, and the human Naboo, who lived in colonies dispersed among the surface.
The human denizens of Naboo, known simply as the Naboo, were governed under an elective monarchy and maintained a peaceful culture that promoted education, the arts, environmental protection and scientific achievements.
The primary Naboo city was Theed, the planetary capital, and the primary Gungan city was Otoh Gunga.
Naboo is known to be orbited by three moons: within the current canon, Naboo's moons are known as Ohma-D'un, Onoam, and Veruna; while in Legends, Naboo was known to be orbited by the moons Ohma-D'un (home to a Gungan colony), Rori (home to a Naboo colony), and the ice moon Tasia (named for Queen Elsinoré den Tasia of Grizmallt).

Located in the Chommell sector, Naboo is the home planet of Senator Padmé Amidala and Representative Jar Jar Binks, as well as Senator (later Supreme Chancellor and then Emperor) Palpatine.
In Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace, it was the site of a blockade by the Trade Federation and the Battle of Naboo between the Federation and the native inhabitants.
Naboo is seen in four films in the Star Wars series, having a prominent role in the first two prequels and glimpsed briefly in Revenge of the Sith and the 2004 DVD release of Return of the Jedi.

Theed's architecture, while referencing Ancient Rome and other classical traditions, was heavily inspired by the Frank Lloyd Wright-designed Marin County Civic Center in California, located near Skywalker Ranch and Industrial Light & Magic.
The swamps of Naboo are home to many species of creatures including the massive Opee Sea Killer in Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace.
==
Naboo system ==
The Naboo system is located in the Chommell sector, a region in the galactic Mid-Rim.

Naboo is the third planet of the star system of the same name, which orbits the star Naboo.

The Naboo system comprises five planets: Moth (Venus type), Erep (Venus type), Naboo (Earth type), Widow (Mars type) and Storm (Jupiter type).

The planet Naboo has three moons, known throughout various media as Ohma D'un, Rori and Tasia.

==
Geographic features ==
Naboo is described as having a porous, plasma-rich interior without a molten core—a rare phenomenon among the planets in the Star Wars universe.
The surface of Naboo is covered by dense swamps, rolling grass plains, and verdant hills.
The largest mountain chain, the Gallo Mountains, bisect the singular continent and divide the great grass plains of the north from the Lianorm Swamp in the south.
South of the Lianorm Swamp is Paonga Sea, where at the bottom lies the Gungan city of Otoh Gunga.
Underneath the planet's surface is a tremendous maze of passages and caves, home to immense aquatic animals and creatures that are never seen on the surface.
Gungans dominate these 'underwaterways', using them as a highway of sorts between their surface Holy Places and their underwater cities.
The main Gungan settlement is known as Otoh Gunga, where Jar-Jar leads Obi-Wan Kenobi and Qui-Gon Jinn.

==
History ==
It is not known if the aquatic Gungans are the "original" inhabitants of Naboo, but they may have evolved in the interior underground seas or the swamplands.

What is known is that a pre-Gungan humanoid civilization did live on the surface tens of thousands of years ago, leaving monuments and ruins scattered throughout the planet.
The largest of these ruins, located on the northern edge of the Lianorm Swamp, was identified as the Gungan Sacred Place.
Gungans view these ruins as sacred, and their builders as the "Elders" of the planet.
Eventually both Gungan and Human Naboo scientists agree that the end of the "Elder" civilization may be the result of the "Elders" not living in harmony with nature.

===
Human colonization ===
Gungans dominated Naboo for a great time, though largely keeping to the swamps and waterways; the mountains and grasslands they considered 'desert-like'.
In 3951 BBY (Before the Battle of Yavin), human refugees began fleeing violent revolution on their core world planet of Grizmallt.

The Grizmallt leader, Queen Elsinore den Tasia, sponsored a fleet of three ships (Beneficent Tasia, Mother Vima and Constant) to colonize new worlds, commanded by the explorer Kwilaan.
Elsinore den Tasia had the Naboo moon of Tasia named in her honor.
Kwilaan's fleet eventually found and crash landed on the planet of Naboo in approximately 3900 BBY, where they permanently settled in the mountains and great grass plains.
Some believe that Naboo was originally a Gungan word for "plainsfolk".
Cultural differences led to tension between the two peoples—but direct conflict was rare.
Over time there was more conflict between the various human settlements than between humans and Gungans.

The human culture of Naboo remained largely pastoral and nomadic, though urban centers developed.
Deeja Peak in the Gallo Mountains developed as one of the first human settlements on the planet, keeping a degree of political power there.
Keren and Theed both developed as farming communities whose over-production of foodstuffs provided for a large leisure class.
Keren eventually became the commercial hub while Theed became more aristocratic.
Kaadara developed as a coastal town for the few Nabooan fisherman (not to be confused with nabooian).
Moenia was the only human colony built in the traditional Gungan homelands of the Lianorm Swamps.

The Naboo developed into a classic feudal society with a hereditary noble class and common folk, though unlike most feudal societies, there is no record of a subservient serf class.
Naboo city-states traded with each other and with the Gungans.
Generally the city-states acknowledged a ceremonial "High King"—a position that at times rotated between the city-state princes, though at other times was vested in a royal house.
This ceremonial position was largely powerless and a form of peerage democracy evolved.

King Narmele
the Explorer colonized Naboo's swampy moon of Rori sometime around 2000 BBY.
A city there still bears his name.
Some scientists contend that earlier colonists settled Rori before the Narmele colony, but if this is true, no trace of them has been found.

Naboo has two other moons, the water-moon Ohma D'un (later colonised jointly by both Naboo humans and Gungans after the Battle of Naboo) and the barren grey ice-moon of Tasia (named after the Grizmallt Queen who sponsored the original colonial mission).

Naboo culture also includes a strong sense of family in each of the households of Naboo, from commoners up through the royal family.
Wives had an extreme sense of loyalty for their husbands and those found to be guilty of adultery were known to be executed.

===
Naboo during the Old Republic and the Rise of the Empire ===
In 1,000 BBY a crisis led to a large scale conflict engulfing all the human Naboo city states, though there was no evidence of Gungan participation.
Theed's King, Jafan, ended the conflict, uniting all Nabooans under his leadership by 830 BBY.
Jafan ushered in the "Great Time of Peace" and Theed became the Royal Capital, eclipsing Deeja Peak.
Still provincial and little-populated, the Naboo remained wary of off-world influences.
Under the Jafan dynasty, Theed became a showplace of decorative architecture and dazzling craftsmanship, such as the Naboo royal starship and the royal palace at Theed.
(
Note: the Theed royal palace in the films is a detailed physical miniature model and sometimes computer generated exterior, but the interior was filmed at Caserta Palace in Italy).
The forecourt to the palace features statues of Naboo philosophers.
The Jafan Dynasty reigned as hereditary rulers until the last of their line expired (circa 150 BBY).
Since then the position of monarch has been an elected post, with a fluid constitution that would allow for hereditary rulership to be vested in a noble dynasty if the people so desired.

By King Veruna's reign, 47 BBY, Naboo had become a major player in the galactic plasma energy trade market.
Long known as a source of plasma (the energy source that powers everything from simple lights on Queen Amidala's robes, to great Gungan underwater cities and capital starships), high grade plasma veins were discovered below the streets of Theed.
This led King Veruna (47–30 BBY) and (then) Senator Palpatine to build a great plasma mining and refining facility in the heart of the capital.
The Banking Guild financed the construction.
As the Naboo traditionally held an aversion to off world trade they agreed to have the powerful Trade Federation buy the plasma at a fixed price.
The Federation however took advantage of the Naboo's lack of interstellar commercial experience and sold the plasma for greatly marked-up prices — selling the Naboo short.

The Naboo protested and wished to be free of the contract.
King Veruna, never wanting the trade agreement with the Federation in the first place, sensed the upcoming military conflict.
Veruna expanded the role of the Space Fighter Corps and had the N-1 starfighter squadron organized.
Theed Hangar was built next to the refining station to house the new military forces.
This move was unpopular on Naboo and with Senator Palpatine as these precautions were perceived as provocative overture.
With the people and the senator unhappy with his military expansion, Veruna was forced to abdicate in favor of the Princess Padme Naberrie.
Later, Veruna would be assassinated while in exile.
Taking Amidala as her Name of State, the young Queen, Padme, promised to end the conflict without violence.

Once in power Queen Amidala opened negotiations with the Trade Federation.
However, the Federation was scandalized by Naboo's resistance to its authority, which coincided with a Galactic Republic Senate tax on interstellar trade.
Both actions were perceived by Federation leadership as threatening to their commercial interests and power.
The Federation answered with a military blockade of Naboo, with the aim of forcing Naboo into subservience and to hopefully intimidate the Senate into repealing the taxation measure.
The Federation leadership was secretly advised, and manipulated, by the Sith Lord Darth Sidious.

The Jedi Knights Qui-Gon Jinn and Obi-Wan Kenobi were sent to mediate, but were unsuccessful.
Naboo fell quickly; though they had a powerful Armed Corps, the Royal Advisory Council held off action until all negotiations failed.
The Naboo government and citizens were captured and were to be held in detention camps outside the cities.
Soon rescued by Jinn and Kenobi, Queen Amidala left Naboo to personally seek aid in the Galactic Senate.
Captain Panaka and others were to organize a resistance movement in the meantime.

Once on Coruscant, Queen Amidala addressed the senate.
The Federation had powerful and rich allies, and all the Queen could do was to call for a "Vote of No Confidence" in the senate leadership of Supreme Chancellor Valorum.
In this she hoped to force a change for a more favorable chancellorship.
The Queen returned to her homeworld to lead the resistance herself.
Once home, Queen Amidala sought the aid of the reclusive Gungans, pleading for joint action against a common enemy.
The Gungans agreed to an alliance and led an army against the Federation's mechanical forces.
Captain Panaka was able to organize the Space Fighter Corps to their fighters, and launch a last effort against the Federation capital ship.
The Fighter Corps destroyed the Trade Federation capital ship which shut off all of the B1 Battle Droids and the Trade Federation leaders Nute Gunray and Rune Haako were captured.
Qui-Gon Jinn was killed during the battle, but ultimately the Naboo & Gungan Alliance was able to defeat the Federation.
For her heroic effort the Naboo people wished to alter the constitution allowing for Padmé Amidala, and possibly her heirs, to reign for life.
Padmé Amidala declined the honor.

After serving the maximum two 4-year terms, Padmé Amidala was replaced by Queen Jamillia (24–20 BBY).
Jamillia asked for Padmé Amidala to continue serving Naboo as its Senator.
Padmé Amidala "couldn't refuse the Queen", and returned to politics after a brief respite.
Jar Jar Binks was also appointed as the alternate Senator, becoming the first Gungan to represent the planet of Naboo.
Most of the prejudices of both species disappeared when Amidala and Boss Nass managed to unite both species during the Battle of Naboo.

Galactic Republic Senate politics was a new forum for Padmé Amidala.
In the meantime Palpatine, a Naboo himself, remained Supreme Chancellor of the Republic, and his hard-line stances were generally supported by a Naboo still rebuilding after occupation.
Though many on Naboo and in the Galactic Senate wished for a centralized executive, Padmé Amidala voted again and again against the Military Creation Act, which would allow for the Senate to raise a standing military to serve at the discretion of the Supreme Chancellor of the Republic.
Padmé Amidala, however, was outmaneuvered and — after a proposal by Representative Jar Jar Binks' for the granting of "emergency powers" to the Chancellor — a military was created to counter the Separatist movement.
During the Clone Wars, the Confederacy of Independent Systems (including the Trade Federation) launched an unsuccessful campaign of invasion and conquest against Naboo.

===
Imperial Naboo ===
Following the rise of the Empire, Queen Apailana became outspoken against the new regime.

After diplomatic negotiations failed between Naboo and the Empire, Apailana began exploring military options, and harboring Jedi in direct violation of Order 66.

She would be assassinated by the elite 501st Legion, aka Vader's Fist, establishing Imperial control of the planet.

In years to come, the Naboo would generally support the positions of Chancellor and later Emperor Palpatine, including the establishment of the Empire, thus becoming an Imperial satellite state.
Many Naboo would serve in the Imperial Services and Captain Panaka would become an aide to the Emperor, and later it would become imperial Naboo.

Popular Queen Kylantha would reign throughout the Imperial years.
Kylantha appointed Padmé Amidala's niece, Pooja Naberrie, to the Imperial Senate.
There, Pooja would be a contemporary of her cousin, Princess Leia of Alderaan, but they would not know of each other's biological relationship until 36 years after the Battle of Yavin.
Kylantha was not a supporter of the old Republic, but neither was she an Imperial proponent.
Kylantha refused to alter the democratic structure of the Naboo constitution.
It is believed Kylantha was secretly pro-Rebellion, ironically despite the Empire placing her in the position of Queen when the Imperial 501st executed the previous monarch, Queen Apailana, for secretly sheltering surviving Jedi within the Royal Palace of the Naboo capital city of Theed during 18 BBY.

Star Wars:
Shattered Empire reveals that shortly after the Battle of Endor, the Empire used a superweapon to negatively affect the planet's weather.
Leia was visiting her mother's home world at the time of the attack.

==
Royal traditions ==


===
Names of state ===
Often when a Nabooan enters into political life, he or she adopts a "Name of State".
This name is used for public occasions and represents the honor and dignity of the office one chooses.
Padmé Naberrie adopted the anonymous Name of State "Amidala" when she became Princess of Theed (34-32 BBY) and later,  Queen of the Naboo (32-24 BBY).
Padmé retained the name Amidala when she became Naboo's Senator for the Galactic Republic (23-19 BBY).

===
Scar of Remembrance ===
The Scar of Remembrance is used as part of the ruler of the planet
Naboo's make-up.

It is a symbol of remembrance of the days before the "Great Time of Peace", which had been brought about by King Jafan, the ruler who united Naboo.

Also worn by Naboo's monarchs as part of their makeup are the coloured twin cheek-spots of "Balance" and "Symmetry".

==
Known monarchs of Naboo ==
King Narmele (c. 2,000 BBY)
Queen Yarm (c. 500 years before Queen Amidala)
King Jafan (c. 532 BBY)
King Tapalo (65 BBY – 46 BBY)
King Veruna (47 BBY – 30 BBY)
Queen Amidala (32 BBY – 24 BBY)
Queen Jamillia (24 BBY – 22 BBY)
Queen Neeyutnee (22 BBY – 20 BBY) - Clone Wars Era
Queen Apailana (20 BBY – 18 BBY)
Queen Kylantha (18 BBY – throughout the Imperial era)
Queen Sosha Soruna (4 ABY -)


==
Known senators of Naboo ==
Senator Vidar Kim
(?
BBY – 52 BBY)
Senator Sheev Palpatine (52 BBY – 32 BBY)
Senator Padmé Amidala (22 BBY – 19 BBY)
Senator Jar Jar Binks (19 BBY – 6 BBY)
Senator Pooja Naberrie (6 BBY– 0 BBY)
Senator Thadlé Berenko (?
ABY - 34 ABY)


==
See also ==
List of Star Wars planets and moons


==
References ==
Expanded Universe source materials:
Inside the Worlds of Star Wars:
Episode
I, The Complete Guide To the Incredible Locations From the Phantom Menace, Kristin Lund.
2000.
DK Publishers, INC.

Star Wars
Episode
I:
The Visual Dictionary, David West Reynolds.
1999.
DK Publishers, INC.

A Guide To the Star Wars Universe, Third Edition, Bill Slavicsek.
The Ballantine Publishing Group.

Prima's Official Strategy Guide:
Star Wars Galaxies, an Empire Divided, 2003.
Prima Games, a division of Random House,
Inc.
Star Wars Galaxies:
An Empire Divided in-game source material and Sony Online Entertainment.
== Moons of Naboo ==
Canon2 moons in appearance.

OnoamNo-one knows of Onoam's orbital position, but it was known to host second homes to Sector Governor Quarsh Panaka and Queen Dalné.
Later, Senator Leia Organa came and established a mine.
The Grid Coordinates were 0-17, but no-one knows its XYZ coordinates.

==
Appearances ==
Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace
Star Wars:
Episode II – Attack of the Clones
Star Wars:
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith
Star Wars: Episode VI – Return of the Jedi (2004 edition)
Star Wars Galactic Battlegrounds
Star Wars Galactic Battlegrounds:
Clone Campaigns
Star Wars: Battle for Naboo (videogame)
Lego Star Wars
Star Wars: Battlefront
Star Wars Battlefront II
Angry Birds Star Wars II


==
External links ==
Naboo in the StarWars.com Databank
Naboo on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic II –
The Sith Lords is a role-playing video game developed by Obsidian Entertainment and published by LucasArts.
It is the sequel to BioWare's Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic and was released for the Xbox on December 6, 2004, for Microsoft Windows on February 8, 2005, and OS X and Linux on July 21, 2015.
Like its predecessor, it is set in the Star Wars universe 4,000 years before the events of the film
Episode
I:
The Phantom Menace and is based on the d20 System developed by Wizards of the Coast.
The game uses the Odyssey Engine, which was originally used in Knights of the Old Republic.
The plot first started being written before the original Knights of the Old Republic was released, and development began in October 2003, after BioWare offered Obsidian their Star Wars license due to being confident in their previous work.

Knights of the Old Republic II starts five years after the events of the first game and follows the story of The Exile, a Jedi Knight who was exiled from the Jedi Order.
During this time, the Jedi Order has been almost completely wiped out by the Sith.
The game begins with the protagonist waking up from unconsciousness on an asteroid mining facility.
After he or she escapes with the help of their party members, they find the person who exiled them ten years ago, who sends the protagonist on a mission to seek out the remaining Jedi to fight against the Sith.

The game's critical reception upon its release was generally positive; praise was given to the story, characters, and writing, which were noted to be more grey than the original Knights of the Old Republic.
Particular praise was given to one of the game's party members Kreia,  with GameSpy naming her the best video game character of 2005.
However, the game received criticism for being too similar to its predecessor in terms of graphics and gameplay systems, as well as being launched in an incomplete state.
The game was included in the book 1001 Video Games
You Must Play Before You Die.

==
Gameplay ==
Knights of the Old Republic II is not a turn based game, but is a role-playing video game played from a third-person view that features pausable real-time combat.
Combat and interactions with the environment and non-player characters in Knights of the Old Republic II are based on the d20 System as in Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic.
The game starts with a character creation screen with several choices to make, and there is also an option of letting the game do it automatically.
There are 30 new Force powers, which are manifestations of the Force, in Knights of the Old Republic II.
Like its predecessor, the game has several minigames, including swoop bike racing and a card game called Pazaak.
The interface has been streamlined from the original game and party management has been made easier; for example, the player can switch between two selected weapon sets in the menu.
As in the first game, the player can choose to align with either the light side or the dark side.
Choosing dialogue options that are respectful and empathetic gives the protagonist light side points, while options that are egotistic and evil result in dark side points.
The combat of Knights of the Old Republic II is identical to its predecessor.
Several new lightsaber forms were added to the game.
Each of them is useful for a different situation.
For example, one is best for enemies using blaster weapons, while another would be good for recovering from using Force powers.
The player can use a variety of melee and ranged weapons, including swords and firearms.
Fighting unarmed is also an option.
A new addition to the game is "prestige classes", add-ons to the Jedi classes that were established in Knights of the Old Republic.
They allow the player character to practice in lightsaber combat or Force powers, depending on player choice.
The player can travel with up to two party members at a time, who gain experience points at the same rate as the player character.
Equipment and perks for party characters can be selected for different statistical effects or abilities.
Players can loot corpses and various environmental objects.
The protagonist also has the ability to "influence" their party members; by doing things that impress them, the player increases their influence with them.
Depending on the level of influence, party members may support the player character unconditionally or turn against the protagonist.
The player can also exploit high influence by drawing party members to either the light side or the dark side, and some characters can even be trained to use the Force.
==
Synopsis ==


===
Setting ===
The game takes place five years after the events of Knights of the Old Republic and 4,000 years before Episode I:
The Phantom Menace, in a time when the Jedi have been nearly exterminated by the Sith.
The player's character, a former Jedi Knight exiled from the Jedi Order, is referred to as "The Exile" or "Jedi Exile".
Throughout the game, the Exile restores their connection to the Force while, with the help of playable companions, setting out to stop the Sith.
The player makes choices that turn the Exile to either the light side or the dark side of the Force, and they travel to six planets to either help or hinder the Republic's efforts to bring peace and stability to the galaxy.
New playable locations in Knights of the Old Republic II include Telos, Onderon and its moon Dxun, Nar Shaddaa, Malachor V, the Peragus Mining Facility, and various starships such as the hijacked Republic cruiser Harbinger, the Sith cruiser Ravager, and Goto's yacht orbiting Nar Shaddaa.
Two planets featured in the original game, Korriban and Dantooine, are revisited, both with ravaged buildings and intensified problems.
The Ebon Hawk, the main character's ship in the first game, is also the player's transportation in Knights of the Old Republic II.

===
Characters ===
The Exile's backstory reveals that the character served under Revan during the Mandalorian Wars and ordered the activation of a devastating weapon in the climactic battle over
Malachor V. The deaths that ensued created such a substantial "wound" in the Force that the character was forced to sever their connection to the Force to survive, and the Jedi Council ordered the character exiled from the Jedi Order.
As the game progresses, the Jedi Exile rebuilds a connection to the Force and creates unusually strong Force Bonds with other characters and places, while unknowingly sapping Force powers.
Among the characters who join the Jedi Exile are Kreia, who acts as the Exile's mentor; pilot and former Sith assassin Atton Rand; technician and Mandalorian War veteran Bao-Dur and his droid remote; the criminal droid G0-T0; and the Sith apprentice Visas Marr.
T3-M4 and Canderous Ordo (now identified as "Mandalore")
, both featured in the first game, also join the Exile's team.
Other characters join the Exile's party under certain conditions.
HK-47, who appears in the first game, joins the quest if the Exile collects and uses the parts necessary to reactivate him.
Depending on the player's alignment, the Exile will either be joined by the bounty hunter Mira (light side or neutral) or by her rival, a Wookiee bounty hunter known as Hanharr (dark side).
Depending on the player's gender (canonically female), the Exile will either be joined by Mical the Disciple (female Exile) or Brianna the Handmaiden (male Exile).The game features three main antagonists: Darth Traya, a mysterious assailant who remains in the dark through most of the game; Darth Sion, an undead Sith Lord who once served under Exar Kun in the Great Sith War (as seen in Tales of the Jedi); and Darth Nihilus, a Sith Lord whose physical being was destroyed due to his immense affinity to the Force.
These three Sith Lords are leaders of a loose affiliation of warriors and assassins leftover from Darth Malak's empire from the previous game.
In between the events of that game and this one, the Sith have launched a largely successful genocide campaign against the Jedi Order.
Another major antagonist is Atris, a former member of the Jedi Council whose unethical efforts to thwart the Sith come into conflict with the Exile.

===
Plot ===
While hiding on the Harbinger, a Republic cruiser, the Exile is sedated by an HK-50 assassin droid to be delivered to a crime syndicate called the Exchange, who have put out a bounty on live Jedi.
The Exile is rescued by Kreia, with whom the Exile forms a Force Bond, and the droid T3-M4 on the Ebon Hawk, and the three flee the Harbinger as it is hijacked by a squad of Sith assassins.
However, their ship is damaged during the escape by the Harbinger's gunfire, and they eventually arrive at the Peragus Mining Facility.
Teaming up with smuggler Atton Rand, the group escapes to the planet Telos IV.
While hiding out on Telos, they encounter Atris, a surviving member of the Jedi Council who sentenced the protagonist to exile ten years prior.
After settling a dispute regarding the Exile's past sentence, Atris forms an uneasy alliance with them, instructing them to seek out other surviving Jedi in order to rally against the Sith.
The Exile then travels to four worlds to find reclusive Jedi Masters and either beg for their aid or kill them in revenge for being exiled, depending on player choice.
As the Exile continues their journey, they are joined by several individuals in their quest.
After finding all the Masters, the Exile travels back to Dantooine and learns that the countless deaths at Malachor V resulted in the Exile unconsciously giving up their connection to the Force, which then became the teachings of the new Sith.
If the player aided the Jedi Masters, they prepare to strip the Exile of their Force connection permanently, as the Masters fear that these teachings could result in the actual death of the Force, but Kreia reveals herself to be the former leader of the Sith and murders them all in retribution.
If the player killed the Jedi Masters, Kreia attacks the Exile and leaves.
Tracking Kreia to Telos, the Exile fights and defeats a corrupted Atris, from whom it is learned that Kreia plans to strengthen a massive wound in the Force made ten years prior.
This wound had been created by the Exile during the Mandalorian Wars, when they activated a superweapon in order to end the battle on the planet Malachor V, causing mass death and destruction.
Before following her to Malachor V, where Kreia had since rejoined the Sith as Darth Traya, the Exile stops a Sith invasion of Telos, defeating one of Traya's former apprentices, the Sith Lord Darth Nihilus.
On Malachor V, the Exile is separated from their companions and fights through hordes of monsters on the planet's surface and the inhabitants of a large Sith Academy who survived the cataclysm.
On the final floor of the academy, the Exile kills the Sith Lord Darth Sion and confronts Darth Traya in the planet's core.
The Exile defeats the Sith Lord, but before Traya dies, she delivers a prophetic vision of the future pertaining to the player's companions and the worlds that were visited over the course of the story.
Depending on the Exile's alignment, they either order the destruction of Malachor V, escaping before it is destroyed, and travel into the Unknown Regions in search of Revan (light side), or remain on Malachor V as the new Dark Lord of the Sith (dark side).

==
Development ==
Knights of the Old Republic II was developed by Obsidian Entertainment and published by LucasArts.
It is the sequel to BioWare's Knights of the Old Republic, and it uses the same Odyssey Engine as the original game.
BioWare suggested that Obsidian should be offered the Knights of the Old Republic license due to their familiarity with Obsidian's past work and the good relationship between the two developers, as well as due to finding LucasArts' development schedule for the sequel to be too tight.
The game was released in PC and Xbox versions, but due to the Xbox version being released two months prior to the PC version, it has multiple unfixed bugs.
Development of the game began in October 2003.
The overview of the game's story was originally drafted before the first Knights of the Old Republic was released, after which it saw many revisions and also some major redrafts.
In preparation to write Knights of the Old Republic II, lead designer Chris Avellone tried to learn as much about the Star Wars universe as possible.
He read many books, guides, modules, and graphic novels, and the Obsidian team also relied on the first Knights of the Old Republic and the original Star Wars films for inspiration.
Avellone said that Obsidian recognized one of the things that made Knights of the Old Republic great was the story and the companions, and that they tried to expand upon this by adding more depth to them.
Knights of the Old Republic II uses the same d20 System as the first Knights of the Old Republic with some changes, and the level cap has also been removed.
For the most part, the team didn't want to redo any of the design elements from the first game, as they felt that there was no need to change anything that had already proved successful; instead, they opted to look for areas that could be improved and expanded upon them in a way that retained the base style of Knights of the Old Republic.
Obsidian put much work into the game's graphics, including the appearances of non-player characters.
Other technological improvements include the lighting and weather effects, in addition to increasing the level sizes.
Knights of the Old Republic II's lead artist was Aaron Meyers; he decided which people would join the art team after looking through "tons of applications, resumes, and demo reels", and he said that he was pleased with the number of people who wanted to work for Obsidian.
Meyers also complained about the short deadline the development team had to deal with.
Obsidian's COO, Chris Parker, said that the schedule set for the development team was "extremely aggressive", and that the team felt a lot of pressure because they were "making a sequel to the game of the year for 2003".
For the music, the development team felt that symphony orchestra would work best for Knights of the Old Republic II.
The musical score was composed by Mark Griskey, who developed music and themes for characters and places, including the Jedi's theme, Darth Sion's theme and Darth Nihilus's theme (which both have many similarities with the Emperor's theme from Return of the Jedi).
He also created a theme for the main character, which is heard occasionally when he or she experiences internal conflict.
The ~55-minute score was recorded by the Sinfonia Orchestra in Seattle.
The opening crawl utilizes the version of John Williams' main Star Wars theme that was re-recorded for the prequel trilogy.

When Obsidian was preparing to present Knights of the Old Republic II at E3 2004, they tried to fit as much information as they could, saying that it would need to be a duration of 30 minutes as it was the only E3 event it would be showcased at; however, due to the limited time frame, they would have to cut it down to a five- to ten-minute presentation.
During this time, none of the levels Obsidian designed were ready to be shown, so they picked three levels and put them through a schedule to finish them on time.
The demo was finished a few days before the event, and the game was presented in May 2004.
The first trailer for Knights of the Old Republic II was later unveiled in July 2004, and the official website was launched in October.
When looking back at Knights of the Old Republic II in a 2013 interview, Avellone said that because of LucasArts forcing Obsidian to finish the game in a short time frame of 14 to 16 months, the game ended up being in an "unfinished" state.
However, Avellone said that Obsidian was at fault for this due to not cutting out enough things; he noted that all minigames should have been removed, and also said that there were too many in-engine cutscenes.
Obsidian's co-founder, Feargus Urquhart, said that the game was originally going to be released in 2005, but it was later moved up to December 2004 after E3; according to him, Obsidian had to choose between "get[ting] in trouble or get[ting] it done".
Due to this, several cuts had to be made; one of the most major was the droid planet M4-78, which was entirely removed from the game after the 2004 E3 event when the team realized that they wouldn't be able to fit it into the schedule.
M4-78's designer, Kevin Saunders, explained that he moved assets from that planet to Nar Shaddaa's yacht level in order to complete it on time, which was prior also likely to be cut from the game.
The Xbox version of Knights of the Old Republic II went gold on November 23, 2004; it was later released on December 6, 2004 in the United States, and the PC version was released on February 8, 2005.
In Europe, the game was released simultaneously for both platforms on February 11.
The game was later re-released in August 2012 on the digital distribution platform, Steam, and in January 2015 on GOG.com.

On July 21, 2015, OS X and Linux versions were released along with new support for Steam Workshop and other Steamworks features, controller input, and modern widescreen resolutions up to 5K. Backward compatibility for the Xbox One was announced in April 2018.
An iOS and Android version was released on December 18, 2020.Along with several official patches, a fan-released unofficial patch by a modding community fixed around 500 remaining bugs, along with restoring most of the content that was cut from the game.
There were also methods found by the community for improving compatibility on modern PC operating systems.

== Reception ==


===
Commercial performance ===
According to The NPD Group, Knights of the Old Republic II sold 458,000 copies in North America during the month of December 2004.
It entered their chart for the month at number 11, and at number 3 on the Xbox-only chart.
After its North American release on Windows, it debuted at number 2 on the PC chart for the month of February.
In the United Kingdom, the game debuted at the top of the weekly chart, beating Blizzard Entertainment's much-anticipated online game World of Warcraft, which was released in the same week.
Eurogamer reported that in the UK Knights of the Old Republic II sold much more in its first week than the first game, which the website speculates was helped by the former's simultaneous release on Windows and Xbox in PAL regions, as opposed to the latter's initial Xbox-only release.
During 2005 alone, the Xbox version sold more than 60,000 copies in the region.
By early 2006, Knights of the Old Republic II had sold almost 1.5 million copies.
Its sales in the United States alone reached 1.275 million by 2008.

===
Critical reception ===
Knights of the Old Republic II was met with positive reception upon its release; on Metacritic, it has an aggregate score of 85/100 and 86/100 on the PC and Xbox versions respectively, indicating "generally favorable reviews" according to the site.
IGN said that there is a bulk of pressure involved with developing the sequel to a game from a different developer which won several "Game of the Year" awards, and that Obsidian delivered.
The review also said that it will not disappoint fans of the original game and that it is mostly similar to it in terms of the model.
GamePro praised both the first and second Knights of the Old Republic and said that the second game continues the series' tradition of not fixing what is not broken.
GameSpot echoed this statement, also saying that both the good things and the shortcomings from the first game are present in Knights of the Old Republic II.GameSpy compared the game to The Empire Strikes Back from the original Star Wars film trilogy in that it is the best of the series in terms of story, and also said that the game has the best story in a video game since Planescape: Torment.
1UP.com wrote that Obsidian surpassed the original Knights of the Old Republic in terms of the writing, saying that the plot is more consistent, the dialogue is edgier and the moral choices are more significant; Computer Gaming World agreed, writing, "your decision making, as you pursue a light or dark path, is more ambiguous, with more unexpected consequences".
Eurogamer said that compared to the original game, Knights of the Old Republic II's plot is "far more grey".
The review also said that planets are "better developed and paced".
GameZone wrote that the game is a "Must Buy" for people who like well-written characters and story.
The combat was generally well-received, with some reviewers noting that it is mostly unchanged from the original Knights of the Old Republic.
GameSpot compared the combat from the first Knights of the Old Republic to the second, saying that it is not well-balanced in both; however, the reviewer wrote that it helps the combat remain spontaneous.
GameZone said that the combat is not changed from the first Knights of the Old Republic to the second, but that this is a good thing since the combat in the original was enjoyable.
IGN praised the game's AI, saying that it is easy to control the main character alone without controlling the party members.
GameSpy's reviewer, on the other hand, said that he encountered problems with the combat AI that were not present in the original Knights of the Old Republic.
GameSpot criticized Knights of the Old Republic II's graphics, calling them "lackluster".
GameSpy's reviewer felt that the game's graphics were disappointing, calling them "a little dated" and "half-baked".
The reviewer further criticized the graphics for looking the same as they were in the first game of the series, saying that they could only be considered "good" during the release of that game.
GameZone said that the game looks exactly the same as the original Knights of the Old Republic and that it does not compare to the majority of mainstream games released at the time.
GameSpy called the music in the game "excellent"; however, the reviewer noted that some of it is re-used from the first game of the series.
The GameSpy reviewer also said that while the majority of the voice-acting is good, there are "a few more examples of bad voice-acting" than in the first Knights of the Old Republic.
GameZone said that the "top-notch" voice acting complements the game's very well-written dialogue, and also praised the game's sound effects.
The game was criticized for its glitches; several players reported having problems with pathfinding bugs.
1UP.com's reviewer condemned Knights of the Old Republic II for having the same bugs and technical issues as in the first game, saying that his party "still had a tendency to warp and skip around the map at times", and he also criticized the pathfinding in the game.
GameSpy said that the game's bugs are "hard to forgive", and that these issues did not occur in the first Knights of the Old Republic.
In a different article, GameSpy said that the game is incomplete, and attributed this to its rushed deadline.
GameSpy called Kreia the best video game character of 2005, saying that she was "easily the most intriguing, complicated, enigmatic, well-designed and nuanced character in a video game this year".
The game received runner-up placements in GameSpot's 2004 "Best Role-playing Game", "Best Voice Acting", "Best New Character" and "Best Game
Based on a TV or Film Property" award categories across all platforms.
In 2010, the game was included as one of the titles in the book 1001 Video Games
You Must Play Before You Die.

==
References ==
Footnotes
Citations


==
External links ==
Star Wars Knights of the Old Republic II:
The Sith Lords at MobyGames
Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic II:
The Sith Lords on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Star Wars:
Bounty Hunter is a 2002 action-adventure video game developed and published by LucasArts for the GameCube and PlayStation 2.
It was re-released digitally on the PlayStation Store for PlayStation 3 and PlayStation 4 in November 2015.
Limited Run Games re-released a limited supply of the game physically for the PlayStation 4 on June 28, 2019.
The game is a prequel to the 2002 film Star Wars: Episode II – Attack of the Clones, and a continuation of the comic book Jango Fett:
Open Seasons by Haden Blackman.

Set in the Star Wars Legends expanded universe, the story follows former Mandalorian warrior Jango Fett during his prime as a bounty hunter, and provides the backstory to the character's role in Attack of the Clones, explaining several elements from the film such as how he acquired his iconic ship, Slave I, met his partner-in-crime, Zam Wesell, and was chosen as the genetic template for the Grand Army of the Republic.
In the game's overarching narrative, Fett is hired by the Sith Lord Darth Tyranus to eliminate the Dark Jedi Komari Vosa, and becomes entangled in an extensive "death stick" trafficking conspiracy while clashing with several criminal syndicates and an old rival.

Bounty Hunter received mixed to positive reviews from critics, who praised its graphics, length, sound and level design, and shooting mechanics.
Criticism was aimed at the game's repetitive nature, camera control, and technical issues, while the bounty hunting system, which allows players to search each level for secondary targets with a price on their head and capture them dead or alive for a reward, was met with mixed reactions.

==
Gameplay ==
Star Wars:
Bounty Hunter is an action-adventure game played from a third-person perspective.
Players control Jango Fett, who has access to a wide array of weapons in the game, including his trademark blaster pistols, a flamethrower, and jetpack-mounted missiles.
They can use Jango's jetpack to fly and reach areas that are otherwise inaccessible, but it quickly runs out of fuel, which recharges automatically when the jetpack is not used; using the flamethrower also burns the jetpack's fuel.
Additionally, Jango can use the scanner built into his helmet to identify individuals and see if they have a bounty on their head.
He can then capture the individuals in question either dead, or alive, by immobilizing them with his whipcord thrower.
When using the scanner, the game switches to a first-person perspective.

In-game, Jango can make use of his acrobatic abilities, somersaulting, and jumping to the side to backflipping to avoid enemies.
He automatically targets enemies, and holding a certain button allows Jango to move around an enemy while keeping them targeted.
If the player is using Jango's blaster pistols, up to two enemies can be targeted at the same time.
There are also many pickups, powerups, and items to help along the way.

Completing levels and capturing bounty targets rewards the player with credits, which can be used to unlock concept art.
Each level has a secret feather, which unlock cards from the Star Wars Trading Card Game by Wizards of the Coast; if all feathers are found, bonus footage is unlocked.
After every level, pages of the comic Open Seasons are unlocked for viewing, and after completing chapters, "blooper reels" for the cutscenes in that chapter are unlocked.

==
Plot ==
Ten years before Attack of the Clones, the Sith Lord Darth Sidious orders his apprentice, Darth Tyranus, to eliminate his former pupil-turned-Dark Jedi and current leader of the Bando Gora crime syndicate, Komari Vosa, before she becomes a threat to his future plans.
Meanwhile, Jango Fett captures gangster Meeko Ghintee after a long pursuit on the Outland Station, and turns him in for the bounty on his head.
Upon returning to his Toydarian friend Rozatta, he is contracted by Tyranus with killing Vosa for 5,000,000 Republic credits.

To find Vosa, Jango investigates the Bando Gora's distribution ring of narcotics called death sticks, and captures death stick dealer Jervis Gloom on Coruscant, who reveals his source to be a gangster named Groff Haugg.
While investigating Haugg's processing plant, Jango runs into his longtime rival, Montross, who is also hunting Vosa, and has killed Haugg via carbonite freezing after interrogating him for Vosa's whereabouts.
Following a brief fight, Montross leaves to find Vosa, while Jango infiltrates the penthouse of Twi'lek Senator Connus Trell, who is also involved in the death stick trafficking ring, and tells Jango to seek the Dug crime lord Sebolto on Malastare before he throws him to his death.

After escaping from a Republic gunship, Jango learns that Sebolto has put a 50,000 credits bounty on the head of his former employee Bendix Fust, who is incarcerated at the asteroid prison Oovo IV.
Believing that capturing Faust is the best way to get to Sebolto, Jango infiltrates the prison, but finds that another bounty hunter, Zam Wesell, has beaten him to Fust.
The two are forced to work together to escape from Oovo IV with Fust, and stage a riot to create a distraction.
After Jango's beloved ship, Jaster's Legacy, is destroyed, he, Wesell, and Fust escape aboard another vessel, which Jango dubs Slave I.
Meanwhile, Montross finds that Haugg gave him a false lead, but hears of the Oovo IV riot, and, realizing it was Jango's doing, decides to follow him.

Jango and Wesell deliver Fust to Sebolto on Malastare, but the crime lord quickly deduces Jango's true intentions and attempts to flee, only to fall to his death down a pipe leading into his death stick factory.
Jango enters the factory and finds some Bando Gora members guarding a ship with Huttese markings on it, hinting at the Hutts' involvement in the death stick distribution ring.
Montross then ambushes Jango again, while taunting him over his adoptive father's, Jaster Mereel, death, and the disastrous Battle of Galidraan, where Jango's Mandalorian forces were slain by a Jedi ambush.
Jango is defeated, but escapes with Wesell's help.

On Tatooine, while Wesell goes to question Gardulla the Hutt, Jango impresses Jabba by killing Longo Two-Guns and his gang.
After learning from Jabba about Gardulla's involvement with the Bando Gora, Jango travels to her castle, only to be captured after an imprisoned Wesell, whom he left in her cell to avoid sounding the alarm, compromises his position.
Quickly escaping, he confronts Gardulla and feeds to her own pet Krayt dragon, which he then kills.
Leaving Wesell behind, Jango continues his search for Vosa alone, only for Montross to attack Rozatta's station in an attempt to hinder him.
Jango arrives to find a dying Rozatta, who gives him a guidance device to help him track Vosa, and asks him to find something to live for besides money.

Jango journeys to Bogden's jungle moon Kohlma, the Bando Gora's secret headquarters, where he finds Montross waiting for him in front of Vosa's citadel.
Jango defeats Montross and leaves him to be killed by the Bando Gora, refusing to give him a warrior's death.
As he enters the citadel, Jango is quickly captured and tortured by Vosa, until Wesell suddenly arrives to rescue him, getting herself injured in the process.
After finally defeating Vosa, Darth Tyranus arrives and chokes her to death, before explaining to a stunned Jango that the bounty was merely a test to find someone worthy of becoming the genetic template for a clone army, and that Jango passed it.
The bounty hunter agrees to be cloned but, in addition to his monetary reward, demands that he get to keep one unmodified clone for himself (thus honoring Rozatta's final wish).
The game ends with Jango carrying the wounded Wesell to Slave I, while telling her not to push her luck when she asks to split the reward 50/50.
==
Development ==
Star Wars:
Bounty Hunter began life when LucasArts was asked to make an Episode II-based game which featured the character, Jango Fett.
In March 2001, game design documents were presented, and development began shortly after.
The PlayStation 2 and Nintendo GameCube versions of the game have different custom in-house graphics engines, each designed specifically to take advantage of the two platforms' unique strengths and work around their unique limitations, but the core game engine is identical.
In the PS2 version, they took advantage of both vector unit (VU) chips to drive the graphics to maximum performance.
The DMA bandwidth was taken advantage of to use a high number of textures.
There is full-screen antialiasing and texture mip mapping support.
They used the second VU1 chip to handle all the character skinning and VU0 to handle all the skeletal animation transforms.
Which enabled dozens of characters to be on-screen without bogging down the frame rate.
They had 10 individually optimized rendering loops on VU1 to speed up the rendering process.
Their PS2 graphics engine could move 10,000,000 triangles per second, and adding the gameplay, collision, logic, textures, sound would go down accordingly to around 30,000 to 50,000 triangles per frame, all at an average frame rate of 30 frames per second.
In the Nintendo GameCube version, they took advantage of the system's fast CPU to achieve a higher frame rate, and added more polygons to characters, especially Jango, who has roughly twice the polygon count on GameCube.
The GameCube's texture compression allowed them to use high-resolution textures.
Texture compression also allowed for improved color variance on textures.
MIP mapping support across the board on all textures helped provide a rich and consistent environment.
They exploited additional memory to improve load times.
They implemented projected shadows on all the characters and an increased draw distance to allow for vista views.

Level design began with what designer Michael Stuart Licht referred to as spatial studies.
Design began with paper cut-outs of various rooms.
Licht would rearrange these rooms until he found a design that he felt worked.
The papers had design ideas written on them so that other developers could understand the overall flow of each level.
Bubble diagrams were then created which represented main ideas for each space.
This was followed by various stages of overview drawings and other drawing studies.
The 3D level design began after such studies were completed.
In-game cinematics were created by Industrial Light & Magic (ILM), and marked the first collaboration between LucasArts and ILM.
Composer Jeremy Soule wrote music for the game, including both cutscenes and gameplay.
The characters Jango Fett and Komari Vosa have their own leitmotifs.
Both Temuera Morrison and Leeanna Walsman reprise their roles from the Attack Of The Clones as Jango Fett and Zam Wesell, respectively.
Production began in November 2000 when LucasArts was asked to make a game based on Star Wars:
Episode II Attack of the Clones featuring Jango Fett.
They presented the game design proposal in March 2001, and development started soon after.
Jon Knoles revealed in an interview that they wanted to develop Jango into the ideal action-based video-game character and that he was to be exciting to watch and fun to play.
Secondly they wanted to develop a story that fleshed out Fett's character more fully than in Attack of the Clones, while at the same time remaining true to the spirit of his character as seen in the film.
It was imperative to not dull the game with a slow story and leaden script; as such, their goal was to work a fine balance between backstory, narrative, and action-packed gameplay.
Knoles said Jango Fett was developed to be an extension of the player's will, the ideal vessel through which the player could live out the fantasy of being the galaxy's most dangerous bounty hunter.
His movement and animation blending system was designed to automatically react to other world objects and to never be unable to use his weapons or devices in any situation.
The jetpack was originally designed to be used in areas specifically designed for its use.
When the team got it working, they changed their minds and implemented a rechargeable timer on it so the player could use it anywhere for a limited time.
At the most, the crew was over fifty people that were working on the game, excluding Industrial Light & Magic (ILM).Their concept artists looked to the team's favorite graphic novels for inspiration and the concept artwork by Ralph McQuarrie, Doug Chiang, Joe Johnston, and others who worked on the Star Wars films.
They were given access to the Episode II script and concept art early on before the film came out.
LucasArts created storyboarded scripts of their cutscenes and gave them to ILM, who developed them into cinematic cutscenes.
Knoles envisioned the level layouts and then consulted with lead level designer David Wehr and his level designers.
They created a bubble map of the levels that they worked from to determine details in what the player would face and be able to do.
The team made a new engine for the game to be able to do what they wanted.
The graphic designers worked concurrently with the level designers to create the environments, which the level designers then used to better visualize what they were trying to do.
Knoles had previously been involved in the development of the Super Star Wars trilogy for the Super Nintendo and often referred to those games when describing certain aspects of Star Wars:
Bounty Hunter to the team.
Industrial Light & Magic and Skywalker Sound assisted in the creation of the game, which was the first collaboration between LucasArts and ILM in the field of in-game cinematics.
Knoles said LucasArts and ILM learned a great deal from their cooperation, which allowed ILM to try new methods for creating scenes, as well as new tools and techniques.
LucasArts provided ILM with models, textures, and a storyboarded script, and then applied their cinematic expertise in adapting the script into dynamic and visually stunning films.
The sound designers of LucasArts and the sound designers at Skywalker Sound worked together to create the game soundtrack.
Skywalker Sound made sounds directly for game animations and events, and created foley sounds.

== Reception ==
Bounty Hunter received average to positive reviews.
GameRankings and Metacritic gave it a score of 71.06% and 67 out of 100 for the GameCube version, and 69.26% and 65 out of 100 for the PlayStation 2 version.
PlayStation Official Magazine gave the game an above-average 7 out of 10, complimenting the core shooting and production values, but criticizing its repetitive nature: "A Star Wars-themed 3D shooter with some optional bounty hunting.
Good fun,
but it promised more.
"
IGN awarded the GameCube version of the game 8.3 out of 10, and the PS2 version 8.2.
Praising the graphics, sound, length and level designs, they criticized the implementation of the bounty hunting system; "The whole process is pretty clunky, and there should have been a way to streamline this to make it more fluid - especially in the heat of a battle when your mark is mixed in with four or five other opponents.
It works the way it is for sure, but it certainly could have been fixed to be more intuitive than it currently is.
"
In the end, however, they found the game to be one of the better Star Wars tie-in games; "Star Wars Bounty Hunter is a solid, if not technically challenged third-person action/adventure.
Successfully combining our favorite aspects of the Star Wars universe with a clever stage design and a fantastic presentation, LucasArts has done a great job in suppressing the myth that games based on the Skywalker universe aren't any fun.
A definite recommendation for Star Wars fans, Bounty Hunter isn't necessarily built for everyone, but for those of you out there who just can't get enough of this stuff, it's one of your better choices for this or any holiday season.
"Less impressed was GameSpot, who awarded the GameCube version 6.5 out of 10 and the PS2 version 5.4.
They found the technical issues of the game to be too significant; "Bounty Hunter suffers from an array of technical problems that have plagued other third-person action games.
You can move the camera perspective using the right analog stick, but the camera will still cause you some major headaches when in tight corridors or when trying to draw a bead on a specific enemy.
Often it'll automatically swivel to point you in entirely the wrong direction.
Clipping and collision-detection issues also abound.
"
They also criticized the graphics and the overall gameplay, concluding that "Star Wars Bounty Hunter may have all the basic ingredients needed for a solid third-person action game, but it falls flat in the execution and is far too often cumbersome, confusing, or in some other way un-fun to be recommendable on its own merits.
Serious Star Wars aficionados should enjoy the game's story, but they'll be forced to slog through a lot of tedious action to see how it pans out."
==
References ==


==
External links ==
Press release
Star Wars: Bounty Hunter at MobyGames
Star Wars:
Bounty Hunter on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Kanan Jarrus (born Caleb Dume) is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise, voiced by  Freddie Prinze Jr.
He is featured as one of the main characters in the animated series Star Wars Rebels (2014–2018) and related works.
Kanan also appears as a disembodied voice in the film
The Rise of Skywalker (2019), with Prinze reprising his role.

Within the Star Wars narrative, Kanan is a Jedi Padawan who survived the Great Jedi Purge after his master, Depa Billaba, sacrificed herself to save him.
From that point onwards, Kanan lived most of his life on the run, hiding from the Galactic Empire, before eventually meeting Hera Syndulla and joining the Ghost crew as its de facto leader.
Although he initially to keep his Force abilities hidden from his comrades, he re-embraces his Jedi role after meeting Ezra Bridger, whom he begins training in the Jedi arts, while also attempting to complete his own training and become a Jedi Knight.
Later, Kanan and his crew join the Rebel Alliance to assist them in their fight against the Empire.
While Kanan ultimately sacrifices himself to save his friends, his legacy lives on through their memories of him, as well as his and Hera's son, Jacen Syndulla.

Kanan's character was received positively by fans and critics, and has been highlighted as one of the better aspects of Rebels.

== Creation and development ==


===
Concept ===
Executive producer Dave Filoni describes the character as a "cowboy Jedi".
Animation supervisor Keith Kellogg said: "He is a Jedi
but he's not a Jedi in the traditional sense that we've had before on the show.
He's a little more rough around the edges.
He's kept his lightsaber locked away, so he hasn't used it in a long time."
After being blinded, Kanan has been compared to the Star Wars Legends character Rahm Kota from Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed, another blinded Jedi, which led Pablo Hidalgo from the Lucasfilm story group to say on Twitter that both characters were inspired by Zatoichi.
Filoni compared Kanan to Gandalf from Lord of the Rings.
In regards to the character's death in the episode "Jedi Night" of the fourth season of Star Wars Rebels, Filoni felt this was a natural end to Kanan promising he will see Hera again before being blinded and said: "In that moment he's not bound as this material thing that the physicality of sight would be a limitation to him."
While sketching storyboards for Kanan's death, Filoni became reluctant to kill the character, but Prinze, who "was resolute about the fact that his character needed to die" since the beginning of the series, encouraged him to write the scene.

===
Voice acting ===
Kanan is voiced by Freddie Prinze Jr. in Star Wars Rebels and Star Wars: Episode IX -
The Rise of Skywalker, and by Michael Benyaer in the micro-series Lego Star Wars: Droid Tales.

==
Appearances ==


===
Animated series ===


====
The Clone Wars ====
A young Caleb Dume makes a cameo appearance in the episode "Old Friends Not Forgotten" of the final season of The Clone Wars, where he is shown as a hologram alongside his master, Depa Billaba, during a meeting with other Jedi.

====
Rebels ====
Kanan first appears in a short film released prior to the series, "The Machine in the Ghost", and his voice is heard in another one,
"Entanglement".
In the two-part series premiere "Spark of Rebellion", Kanan is introduced as the de facto leader of the crew of the Ghost, a Rebel starship, who mostly operate on their own and try to survive.
Although he never finished his own Jedi training, Kanan sees great potential in young Ezra Bridger of Lothal, and decides to train him as his own Padawan.
In the season 1 finale "Fire Across the Galaxy", Kanan, who was captured by the Empire, is rescued by Ezra.
Kanan then fights and defeats the Grand Inquisitor, before he and the rest of the Ghost crew are invited into the Rebel Alliance, now that the Empire has become aware of the threat they represent.
In "The Siege of Lothal", the two-part premiere of season 2, Kanan survives an encounter with Darth Vader, while in "The Lost Commanders", he initially finds it difficult to trust the clone trooper Captain Rex, because clones had murdered his master, Depa Bilaba, as well as most other Jedi, in obedience to Order 66.
In "Shroud of Darkness", Kanan is promoted to the rank of Jedi Knight following a series of adventures in the Jedi Temple on Lothal.
In "Twilight of the Apprentice", the two-part finale of season 2, Kanan travels with Ezra, Ahsoka Tano, and the astromech droid Chopper to the Sith world of Malachor in hopes of finding the knowledge they need to defeat the Sith.
There, they encounter the former Sith Lord Maul, posing as a frail hermit, who has been left stranded on the planet for years.
Though seemingly friendly at first, as he helps the three Jedi defeat a trio of Imperial Inquisitors, Maul ultimately betrays them and escapes after blinding Kanan with his lightsaber.
In season 3, a Force-sensitive creature called the Bendu mentors Kanan in the ways of Force-sight.
Kanan still participates in Rebel missions, with his mastery of the Force compensating for his blindness, but he takes a less active role in leadership.
In the two-part episode "Ghosts of Geonosis", Kanan meets Saw Gerrera, the leader of an independent Rebel group, much like the Ghost crew prior to joining the Rebel Alliance.
In "Trials of the Darksaber", Kanan trains Sabine Wren in lightsaber combat.
Season 4 portrays Kanan and Hera as being in a relationship, and at some point they conceive a child together.
However, Kanan soon dies in the episode "Jedi Night" while rescuing Hera from Imperial captivity.
He regains his eyesight moments before being consumed in an explosion, after containing the blast long enough for Hera and the rest of their group to escape harm.

Despite his death, Kanan makes minor appearances in most of the remaining episodes.
In "Wolves and A Door", while passing through the hyper tunnel on Loth-wolves, the remaining Spectres see several illusions of Kanan and hear his voice, like many others, such as the Grand Inquisitor, Hera, Ezra, Ahsoka and Zeb.
He appears later on in the same episode in Hera's imagination.
She imagines him as a Force ghost comforting her.
In the following episode, "A World Between Worlds", Kanan's voice is heard in the World Between Worlds by both Ezra and Ahsoka multiple times, until he finally appears through a portal.
Ezra makes up his mind to save him and goes to the portal that depicts Kanan's final moments.
Ahsoka stops Ezra from saving Kanan, because then they would all die and because he had found the moment when he was needed most and did what he had to do for everyone.
Though reluctant to do so, Ezra ultimately lets the blast consume Kanan.
The ending of the series finale "Family Reunion and Farewell", set after the Battle of Endor, shows both Kanan and Hera's young son Jacen Syndulla, and a mural on Lothal painted by Sabine, which depicts the Ghost crew, including Kanan.

====
Forces of Destiny ====
Kanan is briefly mentioned by Ezra in the episode "A Disarming Lesson".
===
Film ===


====
The Rise of Skywalker ====
Kanan Jarrus (voiced again by Prinze) is heard in The Rise of Skywalker as one of the Jedi spirits who help Rey defeat Palpatine.
He tells Rey that "In the heart of a Jedi lies her strength."
===
Novels ===
On September 2, 2014, Del Rey Books published Star Wars: A New Dawn, a prequel novel telling the story of how Kanan and Hera met.
===
Comics ===
The comic-book Kanan ran for 12 issues and was published by Marvel Comics, the  series is set during the events of the first season of Star Wars Rebels and focuses on Kanan Jarrus having flashbacks to his time as a Jedi Padawan (when he was known by his real name Caleb Dume).
Two story arcs were produced each ran for six issues, the first arc The Last Padawan focused on flashbacks which happened at the same time as Star Wars: Episode III – Revenge of the Sith showing where Kanan was when Order 66 happened and the clone troopers betrayed and killed most of the Jedi, including his Jedi Master Depa Billaba.
While the second arc First Blood flashbacks focused on how Kanan was assigned under Depa Billaba's mentorship, as well as Kanan's first battle along clone troopers, in the Clone Wars, where he made a friendship with a clone trooper, it features an appearance from Rae Sloane a character from the novel Star Wars: A New Dawn, as well as one from Fenn Rau, a Mandalorian character who would later appear in Star Wars Rebels.

===
Lego ===


====
Lego Star Wars: Droid Tales ====
Jarrus appears in the Lego Star Wars:
Droid Tales episode "Mission to Mos Eisley", which adapts his role in the Rebels first season episode "Droids in Distress".
===
Video games ===
Kanan Jarrus also appears as a playable character in certain Star Wars video games, as described below:


====
First half of the series ====
The following games depict Jarrus as he appeared when the series first began.

Jarrus is a premium character in the now-defunct game Star Wars Rebels: Recon Missions, released by Disney Mobile on iOS, Android and Windows Store, a side-scrolling, run-and-gun platform game.

He has the ability to deflect blaster bolts from a stationary position.

Jarrus is represented as Chuck, the yellow bird in Angry Birds Star Wars II, in its Rebels level set.

Jarrus is a collectible add-on character for the toys-to-life video game Disney Infinity 3.0.

Jarrus is one of the several bonus characters available as downloadable content for Lego Star Wars:
The Force Awakens, as part of the Star Wars Rebels character pack.

====
Second half of the series ====
The following games depict Jarrus as he appeared at the start of the third season, in which he is coping with the loss of his sight.

Jarrus appears in the mobile MOBA Star Wars:
Force Arena as a summonable unique assistant for any Light Side squad led by Ezra Bridger, and was available on the game's initial launch in early 2017.

Jarrus is a collectible, playable character added to the mobile turn-based role-playing game Star Wars: Galaxy of Heroes in a special Rebels-themed update during the game's second year of operation.

He is classified as a tank that disrupts enemy offense, taunts and grants protection to allies.

==
Relationships ==


===
Mentorship tree ===


==
References ==
O'Neil, Shana. "
Ranking Rebels: 5 Highlights from "Jedi Night"".
www.starwars.com.

==
External links ==
Kanan Jarrus in the StarWars.com Databank
Kanan Jarrus on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Qui-Gon Jinn () is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise, played by Liam Neeson.
He is a main character in the prequel film trilogy, serving as one of the protagonists of Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace (1999), while being posthumously mentioned in both of its sequels: Attack of the Clones (2002) and Revenge of the Sith (2005).
He also appears briefly in the 2008 animated series Star Wars: The Clone Wars, and in the 2019 film The Rise of Skywalker as a disembodied voice, with Neeson reprising his role in both.

Within the Star Wars narrative, Qui-Gon is the second mentor of Obi-Wan Kenobi (after Obi-Wan completed his training with Yoda), and a powerful and wise Jedi Master, who became controversial within the Order because of his uncommon beliefs regarding  the Force.
In The Phantom Menace, his mission to protect Queen Padmé Amidala of Naboo leads him to encounter a young Anakin Skywalker, whom he believes to be the prophesied "Chosen One" who will bring balance to the Force.
He concludes Anakin must be trained as a Jedi, much to the disapproval of the Council.
Qui-Gon later partakes in the Battle of Naboo, where he is mortally wounded in a lightsaber duel by the Sith Lord Darth Maul.
In his final moments, he makes Obi-Wan promise that he will train the young Skywalker.
Attack of the Clones introduces Qui-Gon's former Jedi mentor, Count Dooku, who has fallen to the dark side of the Force and has become a Sith Lord.
At the end of Revenge of the Sith, it is implied that Qui-Gon has learned how to become a Force spirit after death, and has taught Yoda this technique, who in turn informs Obi-Wan how to commune with Qui-Gon through the Force so that he could learn it as well.
The Clone Wars also explores this idea.

Outside of the films, the character appears in various canon and non-canon Star Wars media, such as books, comics, and video games.
Since the release of The Phantom Menace, Qui-Gon Jinn has become one of the most popular Star Wars characters, gaining a cult status.
Neeson's portrayal of Qui-Gon has been met with acclaim, with some critics saying he helped hold the film together significantly.
For his role in The Phantom Menace, Neeson was nominated for a 2000 Saturn Award for Best Actor.

==
Appearances ==


===
Film ===


====
The Phantom Menace (1999) ====
Qui-Gon is the main character in the first episode of the prequel trilogy, Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace.
At the age of 48, he is a Jedi Master and the mentor of a 25-year old Obi-Wan Kenobi.
Unlike other, more conservative Jedi, he values living in the moment as the best way to embrace the Force.
Jinn is not a member of the Jedi Council which he desires a place in.

The Phantom Menace opens with Qui-Gon and Obi-Wan sent to the planet Naboo to resolve a political conflict involving the Trade Federation, a corrupt business conglomerate that has blockaded the planet for political leverage.
On arrival they are attacked by their host.
The Jedi retreat to the planet and rescue its besieged Queen, Padmé Amidala.
Their attempt to run the blockade and make way for the galactic capital of Coruscant succeeds, but the queen's ship is damaged and is forced to land on the backwater planet of Tatooine for repairs.

While searching for replacement parts on Tatooine, Qui-Gon discovers a slave boy, Anakin Skywalker, who is extraordinarily strong in the Force; a test of his blood reveals that his midi-chlorian count—a measure of Force potential—is the highest ever detected.
Qui-Gon is even more intrigued when Anakin's mother, Shmi, tells him that the boy had no father.
Realising Anakin might be the "Chosen One" of Jedi lore destined to bring balance to the Force, Qui-Gon bets Anakin's freedom and the spaceship parts on a pod race, which Anakin wins.
The entourage leave Tatooine, but not before Qui-Gon is attacked by an unknown Sith Lord, whom he fights off.
Upon returning to Coruscant, Jinn asks the Jedi Council to allow Anakin to be trained as a Jedi.
Master Yoda senses fear in the boy, and the Council refuses his request.
Undaunted, Qui-Gon vows that he himself will train Anakin when Obi-Wan becomes a Jedi Knight.

Amidala, R2-D2, and the two Jedi return to Naboo to liberate the planet.
There, the trio are confronted by the Sith Lord from earlier, who reveals himself as Darth Maul.
After an arduous lightsaber duel, Maul mortally wounds Jinn, but is subsequently defeated by Obi-Wan.
Before dying, Qui-Gon makes Obi-Wan promise he will train Anakin.

====
Attack of the Clones (2002) ====
In Attack of the Clones, Yoda hears Qui-Gon's voice cry out to Anakin through the Force as Anakin slaughters a tribe of Tusken Raiders.
Obi-Wan discovers that Qui-Gon's old master, Count Dooku, has become a Sith Lord; and Dooku mentions Qui-Gon as he interrogates a captured Obi-Wan, expressing grief over his former apprentice's death and arguing that Qui-Gon would have followed him in leaving the Republic had he survived.
====
Revenge of the Sith (2005) ====
In Revenge of the Sith, Yoda reveals to Obi-Wan that Qui-Gon has returned from the "netherworld of the Force" in order to teach both of them how to retain one's consciousness after death.
In a deleted scene, Yoda hears Qui-Gon's voice before the arrival of senator Bail Organa.
In the novelization, Yoda finally admits that Qui-Gon was indeed a great Jedi Master.

Liam Neeson was originally asked to record some lines of Qui-Gon for the film's deleted scene included in the novelization in which Yoda was going to speak with him.
However, the scene was cut from the film despite being present in the screenplay, and Neeson's voice was never recorded.

====
The Rise of Skywalker (2019) ====
In The Rise of Skywalker, Qui-Gon's voice is heard speaking to Rey, along with other past Jedi, encouraging her to battle the rejuvenated Palpatine.
Neeson returned to voice the character.

===
Television ===


====
The Clone Wars (2008–2014; 2020) ====
In Star Wars: The Clone Wars, the character is mentioned several times throughout the series.
Qui-Gon appears in two episodes of the third season.
On the mysterious planet Mortis, he informs Obi-Wan in the episode "Overlords" and later Anakin in the episode "Ghosts of Mortis" about the three beings who believe, like Qui-Gon, that Anakin is the Chosen One: the Father (the Unifying Force manifestation), the Daughter (the light side incarnation) and the Son (the dark side embodiment).
Later in the sixth-season episode "Voices," Yoda is contacted by the disembodied voice of Qui-Gon.
Despite his presence on Mortis, Qui-Gon is revealed to have not been able to manifest a semi-physical form.
Following his deceased friend's instructions, Yoda goes on a quest across the galaxy in order to learn the secrets of becoming one with the Force as well.
During one of the tests of the Force Priestesses, an illusion of Qui-Gon appears along with Jedi Master Count Dooku and Obi-Wan.
It is only after Yoda passes his test that he is allowed to learn Qui-Gon's technique to retain one's consciousness after death.

====
Rebels (2014–2018) ====
In Star Wars Rebels while he neither appears nor is mentioned, Obi-Wan finally avenges Qui-Gon Jinn's death in the season 3 episode "Twin Suns", where Obi-Wan and Maul have their final duel on the planet Tatooine.
Obi-Wan uses Qui-Gon's favored form of lightsaber combat to bait Maul into overextending himself, allowing him to easily slay him.

Qui-Gon's voice can be heard briefly in the season 4 episode "A World Between Worlds" among many other voices of major Star Wars characters throughout the Skywalker saga, demonstrating how the eponymous realm that Ezra Bridger enters widely spans all time and space in the Star Wars universe.
===
Novels ===
A novel involving Qui-Gon and Obi-Wan, set before the events of The Phantom Menace and titled Master and Apprentice, was written by Claudia Gray and released on February 26, 2019.
===
In video games ===
Qui-Gon has also appeared in several Star Wars video games:
Star Wars
Episode
I:
The Phantom Menace, Star Wars: Jedi Power Battles, Star Wars:
Obi-Wan, Star Wars
Episode
I: Racer,  the Lego Star Wars games and as a character skin (via purchased download content) in Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed.
A version of Qui-Gon as a bird (known as Quail-Gon) is available as a playable character in Angry Birds Star Wars II.

===
Legends works ===
With the 2012 acquisition of Lucasfilm by The Walt Disney Company, most of the licensed Star Wars novels and comics produced since the originating 1977 film Star Wars were rebranded as Star Wars Legends and declared non-canon to the franchise in April 2014.

====
Television ====


=====
Clone Wars (2003–2005) =====
In Star Wars: Clone Wars, Qui-Gon makes a cameo appearance in "Chapter 21".
During Yoda's Force dream, Qui-Gon tells Anakin to enter the mysterious cave on Dagobah where the boy will see a vision of his future.
Later when Obi-Wan reprimands Anakin for being late for his secret Knighthood ceremony, Anakin replies "as far as your wisdom goes, you're no Qui-Gon Jinn!".

====
Novels ====
Qui-Gon's life years prior to The Phantom Menace is mainly detailed in the Jedi Apprentice book series.
In The Rising Force (set 12 years before The Phantom Menace), Yoda encourages Qui-Gon to take a new Padawan learner, following the failure of his previous apprentice Xanatos, who turned to the dark side of the Force years before.
Qui-Gon observes a small lightsaber tournament among a group of the Temple's older students, which includes 12-year-old Obi-Wan.
He takes notice of Obi-Wan's skills, but also of the boy's uncontrolled anger and refuses to train him.
Shortly following the tournament, the Jedi Knight leaves for a mission to the planet Bandomeer.
On the transport ship, Qui-Gon is reunited with Obi-Wan, who is also being sent to Bandomeer to begin life as an agricultural labourer.
During the voyage, Qui-Gon and Obi-Wan help defend a group of Arcona from the criminal organization Offworld Corporation.
After putting an end to the tense situation, the two arrive on Bandomeer, where Qui-Gon receives a letter signed by his former apprentice Xanatos.
In The Dark Rival, it is revealed that the whole ordeal has been organized by Xanatos, now the leader of Offworld.
Qui-Gon sends Obi-Wan off to his Agri-Corps duties, while he plans to meet with Xanatos to find an agreement between Offworld and Bandomeer.
However, Xanatos plans to sabotage their meeting and kill Qui-Gon.
The Jedi Master duels with his former apprentice, and he and Obi-Wan end Offworld's business on Bandomeer.
Xanatos escapes, however.
During the encounter with Xanatos, Qui-Gon discovers Obi-Wan's true potential and accepts the boy as his new Padawan.
As a gift for Obi-Wan's 13th birthday, Qui-Gon gives his apprentice a special rock he found from the River of Light on his homeworld.
In The Captive Temple, Xanatos attacks the Jedi Temple and nearly assassinates Yoda, but Qui-Gon and Obi-Wan thwart his plans, and
in The Day of Reckoning, when they chase Xanatos back to his homeworld Telos, the fallen Jedi refuses to surrender and commits suicide.
Qui-Gon is thus able to bring closure to a painful chapter of his life.
In Legacy of the Jedi, set during both Qui-Gon's Padawan and Knight years, Qui-Gon and his master Dooku are sent to accompany Senator Blix Annon on a diplomatic assignment.
However, space pirates infiltrate their ship and their leader turns out to be rogue Jedi Lorian Nod, a former friend of Dooku's.
The two battle and Dooku lets his anger get the best of him, but Qui-Gon prevents his master from violating the Jedi Code by committing cold-blooded murder.
Years after their first encounter, Qui-Gon and Obi-Wan encounter Nod and once again the fallen Jedi is incarcerated for his crimes.
In Secrets of the Jedi (set seven years before The Phantom Menace), Qui-Gon and Obi-Wan are paired with Jedi Master Adi Gallia and her Padawan Siri Tachi.
The mission, which results in Qui-Gon and Adi being separated from Obi-Wan and Siri, leads to the discovery of romantic feelings between the two Jedi Padawans.
Qui-Gon detects these emotions and warns Obi-Wan of his own example with Tahl, a female Jedi whose murder nearly pushed Qui-Gon over the edge to the dark side.
In Cloak of Deception (set a year before The Phantom Menace), both Jedi fight against a terrorist organization called the Nebula Front, who are secretly following Darth Sidious' orders.
At the Trade Federation conference on Eriadu, Qui-Gon and Obi-Wan successfully defend Chancellor Valorum, but do not prevent the deaths of the rest of the Trade Federation Directorate, allowing the Neimoidians to take control of the Federation.
In the 2010 reference book The Jedi Path, Obi-Wan states that some have called Qui-Gon a gray Jedi.

====
Comics ====
Aside from the graphic novelization of The Phantom Menace, Qui-Gon appears in the "Stark Hyperspace War" plotline in Star Wars: Republic.
In this story arc, which takes place during the same year
Qui-Gon takes Obi-Wan as his apprentice, Qui-Gon and Obi-Wan fight in the titular conflict along with other Jedi such as Plo Koon and Quinlan Vos, and Qui-Gon ends up saving Nute Gunray, the future Trade Federation viceroy.

== Reception ==
Despite the mixed reviews that the prequel trilogy received from various movie critics, Liam Neeson's performance and character received positive reviews.
Colin Kennedy from Empire Online stated in his review of the film, "Liam Neeson has manfully carried the action on his shoulders throughout (the subsequent prequels desperately miss him) and
his final words – “Obi-Wan, promise... Promise me you will train the boy” - provide the movie with its only real weight."
Owen Gleiberman from Entertainment Weekly said in his review of The Phantom Menace, "If there’s an actor who holds The Phantom Menace together, it’s Liam Neeson.
Tersely commanding, he gives the film its only hints of emotional dynamism."
In 2017, Rolling Stone placed Qui-Gon Jinn at the number 25 spot on their 50 Best Star Wars Characters of All Time list.

==
Behind the scenes ==
As revealed in The Art of Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace, director George Lucas conceived the character of Qui-Gon Jinn during pre-production of the film.
This is shown by concept art where Obi-Wan Kenobi is shown alone in the Trade Federation flagship and while meeting Jar Jar Binks.
Even when Qui-Gon was conceived, Lucas toyed with making him the younger Jedi, as shown in concept art depicting Obi-Wan as an older man.
Lucas originally envisioned an American actor for the role of Qui-Gon, but ultimately cast Northern Irish actor Liam Neeson because he considered Neeson to have great skills and presence, describing him as a "master actor, who the other actors will look up to, who has got the qualities of strength that the character demands.
"
Initially, Lucas had planned for Qui-Gon to have long white hair, but that idea was scrapped and Qui-Gon is depicted as having long brown hair in the film.
Lucas says the character is "very independent, always testing the rules," and refuses "to go along with the program.
"
Neeson describes him as "wise and quite philosophical, yet very skilled in martial arts.
He has incredible confidence, as well as a magical quality that enables him to see into the future.
He's not really a rebel, but he has his own code.
"During
the early development of Revenge of the Sith
, Lucas wrote a scene featuring a ghostly Qui-Gon speaking with Yoda about Anakin.
Liam Neeson indicated that he was set to reprise his role, but the scene was deleted before being filmed, although it  is retained in the film's novelization.
The character's name is derived from the Chinese word qigong (气功 or 氣功), a system of coordinated body movement, breathing, and meditation used for health, spirituality, and martial arts training that allows access to higher realms of awareness, and balance of life energy, similar to Tai chi.
This is paired with the Arabic word Jinn, meaning "genie" or "tutelary spirit."
The name translates almost literally as "Guardian Spirit of the Living Force."

"Jinn" could also refer to the Chinese word for power, jin (勁), and the martial arts concept of fa jin, which is the explosive release of internal strength or power.

==
Relationships ==


===
Mentorship tree ===


==
References ==


==
Bibliography ==
Star Wars
Episode
I:
The Phantom Menace Novelization, 1st edition paperback, 1999.
Terry Brooks, George Lucas, ISBN 0-345-43411-0
Star Wars Episode III: Revenge of the Sith Novelization - Novelization, 1st edition hardcover, 2005.
Matthew Woodring Stover, George Lucas, ISBN 0
-7126-8427-1
Star Wars
Episode
I
Who's Who:
A Pocket Guide to Characters of the Phantom Menace, hardcover, 1999.
Ryder Windham, ISBN 0-7624-0519-8
The New Essential Guide to Characters, 1st edition, 2002.
Daniel Wallace, Michael Sutfin, ISBN 0-345-44900-2
Star Wars:
The Phantom Menace: The Visual Dictionary, hardcover, 1999.
David West Reynolds, ISBN 0-7894-4701-0
Star Wars Roleplaying Game Core Rulebook, 1st edition, 2000.
Bill Slavicsek, Andy Collins, ISBN 0-7869-1793-8


==
External links ==
Qui-Gon Jinn in the StarWars.com Databank
Qui-Gon Jinn on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Qui-Gon Jinn on IMDb
Cal Kestis is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise.
He is the player character and main protagonist of the 2019 video game Star Wars Jedi: Fallen Order, an action-adventure game developed by Respawn Entertainment.
Within the series, Cal is a former Jedi Padawan who survived the Great Jedi Purge and went into hiding.
Years later, he is detected using the Force and is then led on a journey to rebuild the Jedi Order.
He is portrayed through performance capture by American actor and model Cameron Monaghan.

Cal has received generally positive reviews, with critics praising for his characterization and the voice performance of Monaghan, but criticism for his "boring" visual design from various sources.

==
Development and design ==
Monaghan provides both the voice and likeness for Cal's character, including his natural red hair.
On playing the part of Cal, he said "It's pretty surreal to see a character that you built and got to explore and imagine.
It's a character that I've really grown to love."
He also stated, "It's such a privilege to be able to play something that has a storied history behind it, but also something that I'm a fan of and have always wanted to be part of since I was a kid."
The actor "didn't want to model Cal on any specific Star Wars character", adding "I wanted Cal's personality and demeanor and everything to come out of his own experiences and his own stories, and to build it from an inward place."
During his audition process for the game, Monaghan wasn't told that he was auditioning for a Star Wars game.
"
At that point I didn't know I was auditioning for a Star Wars game, but I kinda knew.
They made these fake audition pages and stuff, and I was kinda reading it like 'hmmm...
This is Star Wars, isn't it?'
They were like 'No, of course not.'
So when I got into the room and they gave me the toy lightsaber, I was like 'I knew it!"

Before the developers knew who Cal Kestis was going to be, there were several different concepts.
The director of the game, Stig Asmussen revealed "We talked about doing an alien character, we talked about doing a different gender, but we arrived at where we were because at the time, Rey was kind of the thing for Star Wars, so it made a lot more sense for us to have a male protagonist."
==
Appearances ==


===
Clone Wars ===
Cal Kestis was a Jedi Padawan during the Clone Wars, training under Jedi General Jaro Tapal (Travis Willingham).
After a successful mission, Cal, his Master and their troops prepare to leave for Mygeeto when Supreme Chancellor Palpatine initiated Order 66, turning all the clone troops against the Jedi including Cal Kestis and Jaro Tapal.
Tapal, being able to sense the betrayal of his troops, killed the clone preparing to shoot him.
The duo make their way to the escape pods with Kestis sneaking through the pipes while Tapal sabotaged the ship's reactor.
Cal made it to the escape pods with his master despite losing his lightsaber.
As they were entering the escape pods, Tapal was fatally shot by one of the troopers and died advising his pupil to stay true to the Jedi.
Cal kept his Master's lightsaber but was heavily traumatized by this event.

===
Age of the Empire ===
Five years after Order 66, Cal is in hiding on the planet Bracca, working as a rigger for the Scrapper Guild.
After an accident causes Cal's friend, Prauf (JB Blanc) to fall, Cal saves his life using the force and is spotted by an Imperial Probe droid.
Two Inquisitors, the Second Sister (Elizabeth Grullon) and the Ninth Sister (Misty Lee) are sent by Darth Vader (Scott Lawrence) to investigate.
The Inquisitors order all workers to line up and advise them to give up the Jedi.
Prauf steps forward and rants to the Inquisitors about the Empire's rule while trying to protect Cal.
The Second Sister then murders
Prauf making Cal ignite his lightsaber and attack her revealing himself as the Jedi.
He was suspended in midair by the Ninth Sister but managed to free himself and landed on a train.
The Inquisitors chased after him
but Cal was narrowly rescued by Cere Junda (Debra Wilson), A former Jedi, and Greez Dritus (Daniel Roebuck) a pilot and owner of the ship, The Stinger Mantis.

Cere revealed that the trio need to travel to the planet Bogano to obtain a Jedi Holocron which has a list of Force-sensitive children all across the galaxy.
However Cere cannot retrieve the Holocron as she had cut off her connection to the force
so Cal would have to get it.
On the Planet, Cal befriends a droid, BD-1 (Ben Burtt), who shows him a message of former Jedi Master Eno Cordova (Tony Amendola), Cere's former master.
Cordova tells Cal of the Holocron and of an ancient civilization called the Zeffo, that built the vault and the only way to open the vault
is to follow Cordova's path.
Cal and the crew of the Mantis then head to Zeffo, an Imperial occupied planet which was the base for the failed "Project Auger" which was set up to mine for ancient artifacts.
Cal makes his way to the first Zeffo Tomb, the Tomb of Eilram.
In the Tomb, BD-1 plays another recording of Cordova's which tells him to go to the Wookiee planet Kashyyk and find the Wookiee Chieftain Tarfful.
On the journey to Kashyyk, Cere explains what happened to her and her Padawan Trilla, claiming that her Padawan and a group of young Padawans went missing or died.

Once the crew arrive at Kashyyk, they find an imperial blockade with Star Destroyers around the planet.
The Empire is in a conflict with an extremist group of Rebels led by Saw Gerrera (Forest Whitaker).
Greez gets through the blockade but cannot land nearby to where the Wookiee is thought to be.
Cal hijacks an AT-AT which impresses Gerrera leading to him asking Cal for help liberating a refinery with the possibility that Tarfful will be there.
Cal and BD-1 agree to help.
After liberating the Wookiee slaves, they are unable to find Tarfful and Cal leaves Kashyyk in the hands of Gerrera.

Cal returns to Zeffo looking for the recently discovered Tomb of Miktrull
but it was an ambush set by the Second Sister.
The two fight and the Second Sister reveals herself to be Trilla, Junda's former Padawan.
She explains how Cere was tortured by the Empire into giving up the location of Trilla and the other Padawans resulting in them either being killed or turned into Inquisitors like herself.
The Second Sister gets the upper hand in the fight and almost kills him but BD-1 manages to activate an impenetrable laser barrier in between both of them.
Cal escaped into the tomb but was unable to call Cere or the crew as the Second Sister had cut off his communications, using it to taunt him.
He managed to escape her and found another one of Cordova's recordings, which told Cal that the key to the vault was a device called the Astrium.
Before he got back to the Mantis, Cal was captured by a bounty hunter.
Cal woke up imprisoned with BD-1 missing.
He was forced to fight in a gladiatorial arena owned by Sorc Tormo against a number of different creatures and the bounty hunter that captured him in retaliation for Greez not paying his gambling debts.
Cal and BD-1 was rescued by Greez and Cere with the crime lord threatening to have his syndicate chase him across the galaxy.
The crew weren't happy to see each other as Cal cquestioned Cere about Trilla and Greez about the gambling debts.
The argument was cut short as they found out where Tarfful was and set off to meet him.

Back on Kashyyk, they found the bodies of the rebels and learned that Gerrera had left the planet.
They meet with Tarfful who instructs Cal to search the top of the Origin Tree.
At the top of the tree, He finds another one of Cordova's recordings revealing the Astriums location on Dathomir shortly before being attacked by the Ninth Sister.
Cal wins the battle by slicing the Ninth Sister's hand off and pushing her off the edge of the tree.
The crew then travel to Dathomir in search of the Astrium.
They land on the planet and Cal and BD-1 are confronted by Nightsister Merrin (Tina Ivlev)  who warns him to leave and then sends her Nightbrothers to kill him.
After escaping the threat they find a wanderer called Taron Malicos (Liam McIntyre) who claimed to be searching Zeffo ruins.
Cal and BD-1 are ambushed by more Nightbrothers and although they defeat them, they were forced to wander through the dangerous Dathomrian swamps.
After experiencing a flashback of his former master sacrificing himself to protect him during Order 66, Cal's lightsaber is destroyed.
They find Taron Malicos again and he reveals himself to be a Dark Jedi who crash landed on the planet during the Purge and has overtime growing more insane and succumbing to the dark side of the force.
He offers to teach Cal dark power
but Cal refuses and flees when Merrin attacks them both.

Cal traveled to Ilum to build a new lightsaber under the instructions of Cere who also gifted Cal her lightsaber hilt.
While on the planet, the ice underneath Cal and BD-1 shattered sending Cal into the icy water before being saved by a vision of his young self.
However, the crystal that he retrieved had snapped in half leaving the Padawan feeling broken and defeated.
BD-1 plays a hidden recording by Cordova where he reveals that he had trusted the droid to find someone trustworthy and lead them to the Holocron.
The message inspires Cal to build a double bladed lightsaber using the two parts of the crystal and returns to Dathomir.
He finds the Astrium, and overcomes his guilt over the death of his master.
Cal faces Malicos with Merrin's aid and convinces her to join the Mantis crew.
They travel back to Bogano
so Cal can unlock the vault but the Second Sister
attacks him and manages to steal the Holocron.
Cere then reassumed her status as a Jedi and made Cal a Jedi Knight.

Cere tells Cal that she believes that the Second Sister has taken the Holocron to the Fortress Inquisitorius on Mustafar's oceanic moon Nur.
Cere defeats her old Padawan in combat and manages to convince her to let go of her hate.
The Second Sister senses Darth Vader behind her and realizing she was about to die, screamed out "Avenge us" before Vader murdered her.
Cere and Cal ignite their lightsabers and Cere charges the Dark Lord where he easily throws her down a chasm seemingly to her death, Vader then focused his attention on Cal, advising the Padawan that he would be wise to surrender.
Cal agreed but refused to back down.
Vader overpowered Cal and almost managed to kill him before Cal threw a piece of machinery on top of him.
Vader then threw the machinery to the side and thrust Cal out of the room.
Cal decided to run to the turbolift in order to escape.
However, when he got out of the turbolift, Vader was waiting for him and overpowered him.
BD-1 stunned Vader allowing Cal to stab him.
Vader managed to stop the blade from going into his stomach and force pushed Cal away.
Vader then sent Cal's lightsaber to him stabbing him in the ribs.
Before the Sith Lord could strike, Cere rushed in and distracted Vader to save Cal by drawing on the dark side.
Vader noticed this and tried to seduce her to the dark side
but Cal was able to prevent her from fully turning.
Cal then shattered glass to let the water in flooding the room and giving Cere, Cal and BD-1 time to escape.

On board the Mantis, Cal destroyed the Holocron, in case the Empire ever found it, protecting all those on the list and letting the force determine what happens.
He then asks where they should go next.

== Reception ==
The character of Cal Kestis received generally positive reviews, with some expressing dissatisfaction that the final design of the character was "generic" or "dorky".
Elijah Beahm from The Escapist criticized the depiction of Cal's reactions to the deaths of various characters and argued that it makes him unsympathetic as a heroic protagonist.
Conversely, Nick Calandra from The Escapist defended Cal Kestis, saying  "Cal learning to control his emotions and work through his trauma provides an infinitely more interesting character than he would have been had he just “followed” the Jedi way without truly understanding what it means.
Once Cal finally stops fighting the past, sheathes his lightsaber, and promises to honor the teachings of his former master, only then does he become knighted as a Jedi."
Alani Vargas from CheatSheet  also stated that Cal Kestis is a great choice for the main character.
Some reviewers noted that while he doesn't start off strong, the good writing, interesting cast of supporting characters and the entertaining story help the player connect with Cal.

The actor experienced bullying over his red hair, with people making mods just to change the colour of Cal's hair, and spoke out against them.
In 2020, Cal Kestis ranked 50th place in a "Best Star Wars character of All Time" fan poll organized by IGN.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Cal Kestis in the StarWars.com Databank
Rey, also known as Rey Skywalker, is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise and the main protagonist of the sequel film trilogy.
She was created by Lawrence Kasdan, J. J. Abrams, and Michael Arndt for The Force Awakens (2015), the first installment of the trilogy, and is portrayed by Daisy Ridley.
She also appears in the film's sequels, The Last Jedi (2017) and The Rise of Skywalker (2019), and related Star Wars media.

Rey is introduced as a scavenger who was left behind on the planet Jakku when she was a child.
She later becomes involved with the Resistance's conflict with the First Order.
Powerful with the Force, Rey trains to be a Jedi under Luke Skywalker and General Leia, and faces adversaries such as Supreme Leader Snoke, Kylo Ren, and the resurrected Emperor Palpatine—who is revealed to be her grandfather in The Rise of Skywalker.
Rey later adopts the name "Skywalker" to honor her mentors and the family legacy.
Reception to the character and Ridley's performance has been highly positive.
Ridley has garnered multiple accolades for her performances as Rey, including two Saturn Award nominations.

==
Development ==


===
Creation and casting ===
Screenwriter Michael Arndt said that he found Lucasfilm President Kathleen Kennedy's offer to write Episode VII daunting in mid-2012, but he became interested when it was explained to him that the tale was about the origin story of a female Jedi and he met with George Lucas.
The character was known as Kira in the early stages of production, and Arndt described her as a "loner, hothead, gear-head, badass".
Arndt said that he struggled with introducing the young woman as the main character in his story while keeping her from being overshadowed after her early meeting with Luke Skywalker, whose role in the film was eventually minimized.
Ridley recalled that director and writer J. J. Abrams originally intended to name the character "Keera"  [sic], but during filming in Abu Dhabi, Abrams revealed to Ridley that he was thinking of going with "Rey".
On creating a female lead for the new trilogy, Abrams stated that from his initial discussions with writer Lawrence Kasdan, he was excited at the concept of having a woman at the center of the story.
He said that "We always wanted to write Rey as the central character" and that other female representation in the story was also important.
Kennedy stated that, "Rey is the new generation's Luke Skywalker.
"
Rey's background as a scavenger was part of the developers attempting to portray her as "the ultimate outsider and the ultimate disenfranchised person", due to their belief that a person of that nature would likely experience a prolonged journey compared to other types of people.
Daisy Ridley was largely unknown before being cast for the role of Rey.
Ridley said that she auditioned many times for the role over the course of seven months and had to keep her casting a secret for three months.
She was announced as part of the cast at the end of April 2014.
She only had experience with small parts in TV shows.
Her inexperience and lack of exposure were a crucial part of what convinced Abrams to give Ridley the role, as the previous installments had featured relatively unknown talent that would not experience heightened degrees of scrutiny.
Abrams stated that Ridley "was so funny and had a great spark", as well as having her act out an emotional scene, proclaiming that "she nailed it on the first take."
Abrams went on to praise Ridley, saying, "She was born with this gift to be in a moment and make it her own.
She simultaneously works from the inside out and the outside in."
Kennedy proclaimed, "Daisy had a physicality and a self-confidence that was so important to the character we were looking for.
She epitomizes that optimism where anything is possible."
Director Dusan Lazarevic, who was present at the casting of Ridley for a role in British drama series Silent Witness, in addition to praising her acting range, stated, "She showed a combination of vulnerability and strength which gave her a complexity, and there was an intelligence in her eyes that was an indicator she could play quite a complicated part."
Cailey Fleming was additionally cast to portray a young Rey.
Although Ridley said she was "riddled with doubts and insecurities", she said that Rey's hopefulness is what she related to most
: it "was something driving me through the auditions—even though it felt so insanely out of anything that I could've imagined.
"
Ridley recalled her shooting experience as starting off bumpy, with Abrams telling her that her first few takes were "wooden".
But Ridley and Abrams had an "incredibly collaborative" process creating Rey; Ridley recalled that the character "changed from when we first began, she became softer.
And I think that's probably me, because Americans tend not to understand me, so it helped, slowing down the speech and everything just made it softer than I am."
Ridley has said that Rey will have "some impact in a girl power-y way", adding that the character "doesn't have to be one thing to embody a woman in a film.
It just so happens she's a woman
but she transcends gender.
She's going to speak to men and women.
"
In an interview with Elle, Ridley said, "She's so strong.
She's cool and smart and she can look after herself," adding, "Young girls can look at her and know that they can wear trousers if they want to.
That they don't have to show off their bodies.
"Composer
John Williams said he immediately loved Ridley in the film and found composing her theme an interesting challenge.
He said that her theme does not suggest a love theme, but rather a strong female adventurer character infused with the Force for a mature, thoughtful theme.
He added that the "musical grammar" of Rey's theme is not heroic, but conveys "an adventurous tone that needs to illustrate empathy."
===
Characterization ===
Rey is introduced as a 19-year-old woman in The Force Awakens.
She is stubborn, headstrong, brave, optimistic, and maintains fierce loyalty to her friends.
Matthew Yglesias of Vox wrote, "Rey is considerably less callow than Luke".
Ridley says of the character, "It's not because Rey is strong that she's amazing.
It's all the complexities of a human.
It's because she is a well-drawn person who is struggling with things
and you're with her.
"Rey is highly Force-sensitive, which is revealed when she is presented with the lightsaber first owned by Anakin Skywalker, then his son Luke.
Without training, she is able to use the Force and defeat the powerful (albeit injured)
Kylo Ren in a duel.
On the mirror-invoking vision Rey experiences in The Last Jedi, writer and director Rian Johnson said that it represents the character learning that she has to connect with herself.

==
Appearances ==


===
Film ===


====
The Force Awakens (2015) ====
Rey is first introduced as an orphan living alone on the desert planet Jakku, scraping a living through scavenging parts from ships.
She rescues the astromech droid BB-8 and encounters Finn (John Boyega), a former stormtrooper.
Attacked by First Order troops, Rey steals and pilots the Millennium Falcon to evade them and escape Jakku.
Smuggler Han Solo (Harrison Ford) and Wookiee Chewbacca (Peter Mayhew) take back the Falcon in their freighter ship.
She saves Finn and they escape the freighter in the Falcon.
Impressed with Rey's bravery and piloting skill, Han offers her a job on the Falcon; however, Rey declines his offer, feeling that she has to return to Jakku.

After they convene at Maz Kanata's (Lupita Nyong'o) castle on the planet
Takodana to return BB-8 to the Resistance, the First Order is alerted to their presence.
Rey visits the castle's basement vault in which Maz has stored a lightsaber that once belonged to Luke Skywalker (Mark Hamill) and his father before him.
Upon touching it, she experiences a terrifying vision: she sees a battle led by First Order enforcer Kylo Ren (Adam Driver), a flashback of her younger self being left behind on Jakku, and a vision of Luke, the last Jedi Master in the galaxy, who has been missing for several years.
Maz debates that whoever abandoned her will never return to Jakku, and her only option is to seek out strength in the Force.
Feeling overwhelmed, Rey rejects the lightsaber and flees into the forest.

The First Order attacks Maz's castle, and Ren captures Rey when the Resistance arrives.
Ren takes her to Starkiller Base, where he probes her mind for the map piece that BB-8 showed her.
Ren uses the Force to read Rey's mind, revealing Rey feels that Han is like the father she never had.
Rey then resists him and reads Ren's emotions, exposing his fear that he will never be as powerful as his grandfather, Darth Vader.
Ren reports to his master, Supreme Leader Snoke (Andy Serkis), who commands that Rey should be brought before him.
Left alone with a stormtrooper guarding her, Rey uses a Jedi mind trick to get him to help free her.
After sneaking around inside the base looking for a way to escape, she is elated to find Finn, Han, and Chewbacca have come for her.
They watch in horror as Ren kills his own father, Han.

As they try to escape the base through the woods, Ren challenges Rey and Finn, using his lightsaber.
After Ren seriously injures Finn and disarms him of Luke's lightsaber, Rey uses the Force to retrieve the weapon and battles Ren herself.
Initially overpowered, Rey rejects Ren's offer to train her and uses the Force with the lightsaber, disfiguring his face.
After escaping the destroyed base in the Millennium Falcon with Chewbacca and the wounded Finn, she returns to the Resistance base.
While the Resistance celebrates the victory, Rey mourns Han's death with Leia Organa (Carrie Fisher) and visits Finn, who is still unconscious.
She decides to seek out Luke's location, using information provided by BB-8 and the re-activated R2-D2 (Kenny Baker).
Rey, Chewbacca, and R2 travel in the Falcon to the oceanic planet of Ahch-To; upon finding Luke, Rey presents him with his longtime lightsaber.

=====
Related works and merchandising =====
Rey is featured in Star Wars: Before the Awakening (2015) by Greg Rucka, an anthology book for young readers that focuses on the lives of Poe, Rey and Finn before the events of The Force Awakens.
Rey's Survival Guide (2015) by Jason Fry is a first-person account from Rey's perspective about herself and her home planet of Jakku.
Rey is also a point of view character in the 2015 novelization of The Force Awakens by Alan Dean Foster.
Fans noticed a lack of tie-in toys featuring Rey.
Hasbro released a version of Monopoly based on The Force Awakens that excluded the Rey character.
After receiving criticism, Hasbro stated that they did not include Rey to avoid revealing spoilers, and would be including Rey in future toy releases.
Paul Southern, the head of Lucasfilm Licensing, said that they wanted to protect the secrets that "the Force awakens in Rey" and that her character carries a lightsaber.
He said that demand for Rey products was underestimated.
Abrams said, "I will say that it seems preposterous and wrong that the main character of the movie is not well represented in what is clearly a huge piece of the Star Wars world in terms of merchandising."
Regarding Rey's relative absence in Star Wars merchandising, CBBC presenter and voice actor Christopher Johnson stated: "It still baffles me to this day that some toy manufacturers don't think that girls want to play with 'superhero' toys and that boys aren't interested in female characters."
====
The Last Jedi (2017) ====
Rey is one of the key characters of The Last Jedi.
Picking up directly where the previous installment left off, Rey presents Luke with his lightsaber, but Luke dismissively throws it aside.
Luke eventually agrees to teach Rey the ways of the Force.
Rey demonstrates immense raw strength and a clear temptation toward the dark side of the Force that reminds Luke of Kylo Ren, who was once his nephew and student, Ben Solo.
All the while, Rey feels a sudden connection through the Force with Ren, who tells her that Luke tried to kill him while he was the Jedi master’s student (Luke later tells her that he was tempted to kill Ben after seeing a vision of the pain and suffering he would cause, but relented).
In one of their conversations, Rey and Ren touch hands, and through this Rey swears that she is able to feel conflict within Ren, and becomes determined to turn him back to the light side.
Rey asks Luke once more to come with her and rejoin the Resistance, but he declines.
So, Rey, Chewbacca, and R2-D2 leave without him, and Rey goes to meet Ren in the Supremacy.

Ren takes Rey prisoner and brings her before Snoke.
Snoke tells her that he created the Force connection between her and Ren as a trap to reach Luke.
Snoke tortures and taunts Rey, showing her the attack on the Resistance transports, and eventually orders Ren to kill her.
Ren instead kills Snoke, and he and Rey fight Snoke's guards side by side.
After the duo win, Ren asks Rey to join him and create a new order separate from the legacies of Snoke and Luke, but Rey refuses.
In an attempt to get her to turn, Ren gets Rey to admit that her parents abandoned her.
Despite the revelation, Rey refuses to join him and uses the Force to summon Luke's lightsaber, but Ren does so, too, resulting in a standoff that ultimately breaks the lightsaber.
Shortly afterwards, Resistance leader Vice Admiral Holdo (Laura Dern) rams her cruiser into Snoke's flagship, separating Rey from Ren.
Rey subsequently uses Snoke's escape craft to flee the dreadnought as later stated by General Hux.

Rey is later revealed to have made her way back to the Millennium Falcon, aiding the Resistance in fighting the First Order’s troops during the Battle of Crait.
Despite their valiant efforts, the Resistance loses the battle, and Rey focuses her efforts on finding the surviving Resistance fighters to help evacuate them.
Eventually, she finds the Resistance fighters behind a dead-end, and uses the Force to move the rocky barrier aside, clearing the path for them to board the Falcon.
Rey reunites with Finn and Leia and meets Poe Dameron (Oscar Isaac) for the first time aboard the Falcon.
Rey feels Luke’s death through the Force, and reassures Leia that he met his end with "peace and purpose".
As she holds the leftovers of Luke's lightsaber, Rey asks Leia how they can rebuild the Resistance from what remains, and
Leia, gesturing towards Rey, says that they now have all they need.
Unbeknownst to Leia, that includes the fact that Rey stole the sacred Jedi texts from Luke before Yoda's (Frank Oz) ghost burned the tree cave they were in.

====
The Rise of Skywalker (2019) ====
Rey is the main protagonist of the trilogy's final film, The Rise of Skywalker, which is set one year after the events of The Last Jedi.
Rey is continuing her Jedi training at the Resistance base under the tutelage of Leia.
The Resistance announces that the resurrected Emperor Palpatine (Ian McDiarmid) has been manipulating events from the Sith world Exegol and has built a secret armada of Star Destroyers—the Final Order.
Rey discovers from Luke's old notes that a Sith wayfinder can lead them to Exegol.
Rey, Finn, Poe, Chewbacca, C-3PO, and BB-8 leave for Pasaana, where a clue to the wayfinder's location is hidden.
Rey locates the clue—a dagger with Sith inscriptions—with the help of Lando Calrissian (Billy Dee Williams).
Meanwhile, Rey continues communicating with Ren; through this correspondence, Ren learns where Rey is and comes for her.
Rey confronts Ren, inadvertently allowing Chewbacca to be taken aboard a First Order transport.
Attempting to save Chewbacca, Rey accidentally destroys the transport with Force lightning, seemingly killing him.
Rey is stricken with guilt and reveals to Finn that she has been having visions of herself and Ren sitting on the Sith throne.

Rey and the others travel to Kijimi, where programmer Babu Frik extracts the location of the wayfinder—the moon Kef Bir—from C-3PO's memory files.
Ren and the First Order follow Rey to Kijimi.
Rey senses Chewbacca is alive and the group mounts a rescue mission.
Rey retrieves the dagger aboard Ren's Resurgent-class Star Destroyer Steadfast and has visions of her parents being killed with it; Ren informs her that she is Palpatine's granddaughter.
Palpatine had fathered a son who renounced him; he and his wife hid Rey on Jakku, assuming lives as "nobodies" to protect her.
Palpatine eventually found Rey's parents and had them killed, but never found Rey.
Ren also reveals that as the grandchildren of Sith Lords, their connection is actually a dyad in the Force.
Ren urges her to join him so they can overthrow Palpatine and take the throne of the Sith together, but Rey refuses and escapes aboard the Millennium Falcon with her friends.

Together, they travel to Kef Bir where Rey retrieves the wayfinder on the remains of the second Death Star; upon touching the artifact, she has a vision of herself as a Sith.
Having tracked them, Ren destroys the wayfinder and duels Rey.
Leia, dying, calls to Ren through the Force; Rey impales him as he is distracted.
Also sensing Leia's death, Rey realizes what she did to Ren and regrets impaling him.
She uses the Force to heal him and confesses that she did want to join him as Ben Solo before escaping aboard his TIE fighter.
Disturbed by her Sith lineage, Rey exiles herself on Ahch-To.
Luke's Force spirit encourages her to face Palpatine and gives her Leia's lightsaber and his old X-wing.
Rey departs for Exegol with the wayfinder from Ren's ship.
Meanwhile, Ren resumes his true identity as Ben Solo.

Rey transmits her coordinates to the Resistance, allowing them to launch an offensive against the Final Order forces.
Rey confronts Palpatine, who demands she kill him in anger for his spirit to pass into her, making her "Empress Palpatine".
However, Ben arrives and joins Rey.
Palpatine absorbs their life energy to restore his full power and incapacitates Ben.
He then attacks the Resistance fleet with Force lightning.
Weakened, Rey hears the voices of past Jedi, who restore her strength.
Palpatine attacks her with lightning, but Rey deflects it using Luke and Leia's lightsabers, killing him and herself.
Ben uses the Force to revive Rey at the cost of his own life; Rey kisses Ben before he vanishes into the Force.
Rey then returns to the Resistance base and reunites with her friends, celebrating their victory.

Sometime later, Rey visits Luke's abandoned childhood home on Tatooine and buries the Skywalker lightsabers, having built her own in a golden color.
A passerby asks Rey her name; after seeing the Force spirits of Luke and Leia, she responds, "Rey Skywalker".
=====
Related works =====
The novelization of The Rise of Skywalker reveals that Rey's father was a nonidentical clone of Palpatine.
An upcoming issue of the comic book series Star Wars Adventures will feature a story set after the events of the film featuring Rey, Finn, and Poe continuing to fight the First Order.
===
Television ===


====
Star Wars Rebels (2014) ====
Rey makes a brief cameo as a disembodied voice in the television series Star Wars Rebels, in the episode "A World Between Worlds".
In the episode, set 16 years before her birth and 35 years before The Force Awakens, the young padawan Ezra Bridger briefly hears some of her lines from the film (specifically her speaking to the unconscious Finn at the end) in the World Between Worlds, a dimension that exists outside of time and space.

====
Forces of Destiny (2017) ====
Rey stars in the micro-series Star Wars Forces of Destiny, voiced by Daisy Ridley.
===
Video games ===
The character of Rey appears in the video games Disney Infinity 3.0, Lego Star Wars:
The Force Awakens, and Star Wars Battlefront II (2017),
all voiced by Ridley, as well as in the strategy video game
Star Wars: Force Arena.
The character was also introduced as a player "skin" in the game Fortnite.

==
Reception ==


===
General ===
The character and Ridley's portrayal have received critical acclaim.
Joe Morgenstern of The Wall Street Journal proclaimed that Rey is "a woman warrior with the stylish ferocity of a kung-fu star," praising "the verve [Ridley] must have been born with plus the skill she must have acquired as a young actress coming up in England," and stating, "It's hard to imagine what the movie—and the sequels to come—might have been if they'd cast the wrong person, but here Daisy Ridley is in all her unassuming glory, and all's right with the galaxy."
Adam Howard of MSNBC stated that "one of the most pleasant surprises of the film has been the strength of its lead female character," adding that some have likened Rey to a "new feminist icon".
Relatedly, Emily Rome of HitFix argued that Rey is "everything we wanted in a Star Wars female character," praising her for being a character that is "independent, skilled, scrappy, tough, and doesn't need saving."
In a personal essay, Nicole Sperling of Entertainment Weekly wrote about her daughters feeling empowered after viewing the film, stating, "They never commented on how pretty Rey is.
They never had to flinch because Rey was a sexual object to some man in power.
They just felt strong.
Equal.
"Megan
Garber of The Atlantic wrote that Rey "proves herself to be, in extremely short order, extremely adept as a fighter".
Some fans opined that Rey is too skilled despite her inexperience during The Force Awakens, making her a Mary Sue.
Rome wrote that "the speed with which Rey mastered Jedi mind tricks and lightsaber fighting with zero training is the stuff of fan fiction.
Rey is geek feminist wish-fulfillment."
Tasha Robinson of The Verge said that Rey "keeps falling into standard-issue damsel-in-distress situations, then capably rescuing herself."
Robinson wrote "Rey is kind of a Mary Sue character" and that "She's a fantasy wish-fulfillment character with outsized skills, an inhuman reaction time, and a clever answer to every question—but so are the other major Star Wars heroes."
Other outlets, including Ridley herself, have argued that the term Mary Sue carries an inherent gender bias, and that the male characters from the original trilogy did not face comparable criticism.
J. J. Abrams stated that "the people who are getting freaked out are the people who are accustomed to [male] privilege, and this is not oppression, this is about fairness."
He elaborated, "You can probably look at the first [Star Wars] movie that George [Lucas] did and say that Leia was too outspoken, or she was too tough.
Anyone who wants to find a problem with anything can find the problem.
The internet seems to be made for that."
Adrienne Tyler of Screen Rant argued Rey's abilities are explained in The Rise of Skywalker as resulting from the pair forming a dyad in the Force, sharing the same fighting capabilities.
Rey's unique hairstyle attracted attention before and after The Force Awakens was released, being compared to Leia's hairdo from the original film, with debate over whether it would become as popular.
Rey has also been compared to the titular character from the Hayao Miyazaki anime film Nausicaä of the Valley of the Wind (1984).Richard Roeper described Ridley's portrayal of Rey as "a breakout performance", continuing by calling the character "tough and resourceful and smart and brave".
Ridley was nominated for a 2016 Saturn Award for Best Actress for her portrayal.
The first Reel Women in Technology Award for a fictional character was awarded to the character Rey.
Some fans criticized Rey's trilogy-wide character arc as insufficient.

Fan fiction author Ricca said that tension that was built in the first two films never gets resolved in the last film.

She wanted a moment at the end of The Rise of Skywalker in which Rey reacts to and reflects on everything that has happened to her.
Some critics and fans have noted a visual resemblance between Rey's character design to that of Bastila Shan from the video game
Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic, and that her character arc shares thematic similarities with that of Bastila's.
===
Parentage ===
The question of Rey's parentage was a significant point of discussion for the series, and spawned numerous fan theories.
The most popular theories were that she is the daughter of Luke Skywalker or Han Solo, or is Obi-Wan Kenobi's granddaughter (because of a scene where Rey hears Kenobi's echoed voice following a vision in The Force Awakens).
The view that she is Luke's daughter was especially prominent, with fans and critics highlighting their story arc similarities, Star Wars being a Skywalker saga, Rey having a strong attachment to Luke's lightsaber, and being exceptionally strong with the Force without any training.
Some fan theories about Rey's parentage pointed to "Rey's Theme" featured in John Williams' score of The Force Awakens, as the theme shared similarities with the themes for Darth Vader and Luke.
Abrams stated that he intentionally withheld Rey's last name and background in The Force Awakens.
He said that he felt that the origin of Kylo Ren was the only thing that could be revealed in his film and that he knew "quite a bit" about Rey's origin but would give courtesy to The Last Jedi director Rian Johnson by not saying any more.
Former Star Wars:
Episode IX director Colin Trevorrow stated that the answer of Rey's origin would be "deeply and profoundly satisfying" and that Rey is "important in this universe, not just in the context of The Force Awakens, but in the entire galaxy.
She deserves it."
Ridley said that she knew who Rey's parents were.
In The Last Jedi, Rey is coaxed by Kylo Ren into admitting that her parents were "nobodies".
Emily VanDerWerff of Vox equated this scene with Luke finding out that Darth Vader is his father, which was his greatest nightmare.

To VanDerWerff, "Rey's greatest nightmare is being no one."
She added that while Kylo Ren "has every reason to be lying" about this, to her mind it is a good thing that "Rey is the child of nobody of particular importance to the story so far."

Josh Spiegel of The Hollywood Reporter stated that although some fans might be disappointed by Ren's revelation, it "fits in perfectly" with the film's through line that one can be "both exceptionally gifted in the Force and also not a Skywalker" because "the spirit of the Jedi extends ... to anyone with a gift and the power to believe.
"

Conversely, Casey Cipriani of Bustle opined that while Ren might be right about Rey's parents, he is unreliable and "we have to take what he says with a grain of salt and look elsewhere [within the story] for hints of Rey's lineage.
"Before
the release of The Rise of Skywalker, Abrams said that "there's more to the story than you've seen," though, according to Ridley, the facts presented in The Last Jedi would not change.
Rey being revealed as a Palpatine in The Rise of Skywalker received a mixed reception.
Joanna Robinson of Vanity Fair interprets the twist as a rebuttal to the themes presented in Episode VIII, calling it "a blow to those fans who eagerly devoured [Rian] Johnson’s message that anyone from anywhere can be a Force-wielding hero."
Contrarily, Ryan Britt of Fatherly writes that the revelation may be resonant for those with a "Dark Side-inclined family," because Rey decides not to play Palpatine's "stupid game", and "when Palpatine’s face melts off and the dark side disappears into the ether, a lot of emotional family bullshit goes with it.
"
Inverse similarly argues that the end of the film sees Rey reject "any power her grandfather held over her" and "bury the past", in a completion of the hero's journey.
Following the film's release, Daisy Ridley revealed that the identity of Rey's parents had been in constant flux over the course of the production of the Sequel Trilogy.
According to Ridley, during the early production of the Sequel Trilogy, Lucasfilm had been "toying with an Obi-Wan connection" before settling on the idea of her character being no one.
J.J. Abrams then pitched the idea of Emperor Palpatine being Rey's grandfather to Ridley at the start of production on Episode IX, although this aspect of her character "kept changing" over the course of filming.
James Hunt of Screen Rant argues that the idea of an Obi-Wan connection "would've been an equally bad decision," because it would still mean the character "is powerful because of her lineage, rather than Rey simply being powerful because the Force chose her.
It continues the focus on nostalgia and trying to connect everything, rather than letting Rey be wholly new."
==
Relationships ==


===
Family tree ===


===
Mentorship tree ===


==
References ==
Footnotes
Citations
Sources


==
Further reading ==
Hawkes, Rebecca (December 23, 2015).
"
Who is Rey?
Everything we know about Daisy Ridley's mysterious new Star Wars heroine".
The Daily Telegraph.
Retrieved December 29, 2015.

Oswald, Anjelica (October 22, 2015).
"
Meet Daisy Ridley, the 23-year-old who snagged a lead role in 'Star Wars:
The Force Awakens' –
her Hollywood career is about to blow up".
Business Insider.
Retrieved December 19, 2015.

==
External links ==
Rey in the StarWars.com Databank
Rey on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Mace Windu is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise, portrayed by actor Samuel L. Jackson in the prequel trilogy.
Jackson reprised the role in the 2008 animated film Star Wars:
The Clone Wars and the 2019 film The Rise of Skywalker, whilst Terrence C. Carson voiced the character in other projects, such as The Clone Wars television series.
The character also appears in various canon and non-canon Star Wars media like books, comics, and video games.

In-universe, Mace Windu is a Jedi Master and member of the High Council during the final years of the Galactic Republic, who wields a unique purple-bladed lightsaber and is regarded as one of the most powerful Jedi of his time.
Despite the Clone Wars causing him to question his most firmly held beliefs, he is a staunch follower of the Jedi path, but is distrustful of Jedi Knight Anakin Skywalker because of his dangerous potential.
Towards the end of the Clone Wars, he learns from Anakin that Supreme Chancellor Palpatine is the Sith Lord Darth Sidious responsible for the war and attempts to arrest him, only to be killed by Palpatine with the help of Anakin himself, who then becomes Darth Vader.

Mace Windu's character and Jackson's portrayal in the prequel films were met with largely positive reviews.
The character went on to become a fan favorite, and is among the most popular Star Wars characters of all time, as well as one of Jackson's best-known roles.

==
Character conception and overview
==
Several early incarnations of the character who would become Mace Windu were developed in the original Star Wars drafts as the narrator, Princess Leia's brother and Luke Skywalker's friend.
Through the process of redrafting and copyediting, his character was removed from the original trilogy, but was reintroduced in 1994 when series creator George Lucas began writing the prequel trilogy.

During the production of Episode II – Attack of the Clones, Samuel L. Jackson asked Lucas if his character could wield a purple lightsaber as a way of making the character easily distinguishable in large battle scenes.
Although his weapon is not seen onscreen until Attack of the Clones, action figures released for Episode I – The Phantom Menace pair Mace with a blue lightsaber.

==
Appearances ==


===
Film ===


====
Skywalker saga ====


=====
The Phantom Menace =====
Introduced in Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace (1999), Mace Windu is depicted as a 40-year old master of the Jedi Council, second only to Yoda.
The maverick Jedi Master Qui-Gon Jinn comes before the council and offers to train Anakin Skywalker, believing that the boy is the Chosen One of Jedi prophecy.
Windu and the other Council members decline, deeming Anakin too old and full of fear.
After the corrupt Trade Federation is defeated and Obi-Wan Kenobi defeats the Sith Lord Darth Maul, who killed Qui-Gon, Windu realizes that the Sith have returned, and he and the Council reluctantly allow Obi-Wan to train Anakin in Qui-Gon's stead.

=====
Attack of the Clones =====
In Star Wars: Episode II – Attack of the Clones (2002), set ten years after the previous installment, Windu initially refuses to believe that the assassination attempt on Senator Padmé Amidala on Coruscant was authorized by former Jedi Master Count Dooku, now the leader of a galactic Separatist movement.
Having learned of Obi-Wan's whereabouts on Geonosis, Windu arrives to save him, Padmé and Anakin from being executed at Dooku's order.
In the ensuing battle, Windu kills bounty hunter Jango Fett, the template for the Republic's army of clone troopers, and leads them and a cadre of Jedi to victory in a battle with Dooku's forces.
At the end of the film, with the Clone Wars begun, Windu resolves to keep a closer eye on the increasingly corrupt Galactic Senate.

=====
Revenge of the Sith =====
In Star Wars: Episode III – Revenge of the Sith (2005), set three years after the beginning of the Clone Wars, Windu and the other members of the Jedi Council are concerned that the Republic's Supreme Chancellor, Palpatine, may not relinquish his emergency powers when the Clone Wars end.
Their suspicions only grow when the Senate grants Palpatine a vote on the Jedi Council by appointing Anakin as his personal representative.
The Council makes Anakin a member, but Windu notifies Anakin that they do not grant him the rank of Jedi Master.
Further, the Council orders Anakin to spy on Palpatine.

After Obi-Wan kills Separatist leader General Grievous, Anakin learns Palpatine's true identity and informs Windu that Palpatine is Sith Lord Darth Sidious, the mastermind of the war.
Telling Anakin to stay uninvolved, Windu and three other Jedi Masters—Kit Fisto, Agen Kolar and Saesee Tiin—attempt to arrest Sidious, but the Sith Lord easily cuts down Windu's companions and then duels Windu one-on-one.
Windu gets the upper hand and subdues Sidious.
Anakin, needing Sidious for the power to prevent his wife Padmé's possible death, arrives and pleads with Windu not to kill Sidious.
Windu counters that Sidious is too dangerous to be kept alive, and prepares to finish him off.
However, Anakin intervenes on Sidious' behalf, betraying and disarming Windu by severing his right hand.
Sidious then tortures and defenestrates Windu with another blast of Force lightning, sending him flying out his office's window.
Sidious uses Windu's death to start Order 66 and murder the vast majority of the Jedi.

=====
The Rise of Skywalker =====
Samuel L. Jackson makes a vocal cameo as Mace Windu in Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker (2019), the final installment of the Star Wars sequel trilogy.
During the battle between Rey and the resurrected Palpatine, Windu's voice is heard by the former, encouraging her to rise and fight back as all of the past Jedi are with her.
====
Other films ====


=====
The Clone Wars =====
Windu plays a supporting role in the 2008 animated film Star Wars: The Clone Wars, set shortly after the beginning of the Clone Wars in Attack of the Clones.
He is depicted as a General in the Grand Army of the Republic, like all other Jedi Masters.
Samuel L. Jackson reprised his role from the live-action films.

===
Television ===


====
The Clone Wars ====
Mace Windu has a supporting role in the animated series Star Wars:
The Clone Wars (2008-2020), set between the 2008 animated film of the same name and Revenge of the Sith.
He is voiced by
Terrence "T.C." Carson.
Windu is a lead in several story arcs, including taking part in the liberation of Ryloth, having to deal with Boba Fett's attempts at revenge for the death of his father Jango, trying to recover a Jedi Holocron stolen by Cad Bane alongside Obi-Wan Kenobi, and rescuing the captured Queen of Bardotta from a cult led by Mother Talzin, with the help of Jar Jar Binks.

In the seventh season, released on Disney+
in 2020, Windu and Obi-Wan lead the Republic's ground forces in the Anaxes campaign, and the former manages to deactivate a bomb hidden by Admiral Trench as a contingency plan once he is defeated.
Later, during a meeting with the Jedi Council similar to a scene from Revenge of the Sith, Windu orders Ahsoka Tano to deliver the captured Darth Maul to Coruscant, and declines to discuss sensitive information with her, as she is no longer part of the Jedi Order.
While in the process of delivering Maul, Ahsoka senses Anakin turning to the dark side and helping Palpatine kill Windu; archive recordings of Samuel L. Jackson as Mace Windu were used for this scene.

===
Comics ===
In 2017, Marvel released Star Wars: Jedi of the Republic – Mace Windu, a 5-issue series centered around Windu during the early days of the Clone Wars.
He leads a small team of Jedi on a mission to the planet Hissrich, to find out what the Separatists are doing there.
During the mission, Windu's faith in the Jedi path is tested by his interactions with two new characters: AD-W4, a mercenary droid with a thirst for murdering Jedi; and Prosset Dibs, a blind Jedi Master who becomes disillusioned with the Jedi Order and turns on Windu.
Ultimately, Windu ends up besting both adversaries in single combat, and his faith in the Jedi way is strengthened by the experience.

===
Legends ===
Windu appears extensively in prequel-era Expanded Universe material.
In April 2014, most of the licensed Star Wars novels and comics produced since the originating 1977 film were rebranded by Lucasfilm as Star Wars Legends and declared non-canon to the franchise.

====
Clone Wars ====
Mace Windu is a supporting character in Genndy Tartakovsky's micro-series Star Wars:
Clone Wars (2003-2005), which is set between Attack of the Clones and Revenge of the Sith.
The character's likeness in the series is based on that in The Phantom Menace and Attack of the Clones.
In the first chapters, he defends the grasslands planet Dantooine against a large Separatist hovering "fortress", and over the course of the battle, he loses his lightsaber, forcing him to instead use a lethal form of unarmed combat powered by the Force.
In the final chapters, Windu and Yoda help defend Coruscant from an attack by General Grievous.
In the midst of the battle, he realizes that the attack is a ruse to distract the Jedi from Grievous's true objective: to "kidnap" Palpatine.
Despite being too late to save the Supreme Chancellor, the Jedi Master uses the Force to crush Grievous's chest, leaving the cyborg general with the wheezing, asthmatic cough heard in Revenge of the Sith.

====
Comics ====
The 1999 "Emissaries to Malastare" arc of the Dark Horse Comics' self-titled Star Wars series, set shortly after The Phantom Menace, mentions a Jedi exercise in which Windu had swapped his lightsaber with Eeth Koth.
However, the lightsaber returned to him is blue, so this does not explain why his saber color changed to purple, as is sometimes claimed.

====
Novels ====
Windu has appeared as a supporting character in Legends/
Expanded Universe novels, such as Cloak of Deception, Darth Maul: Shadow Hunter, Rogue Planet, Outbound Flight, The Cestus Deception, Jedi Trial, Yoda: Dark Rendezvous and Labyrinth of Evil.

=====
Shatterpoint
=====
Mace Windu is the central character of Matthew Stover's 2004 novel Shatterpoint, taking place six months after Attack of the Clones.
Stover based the novel on both Joseph Conrad's novel Heart of Darkness, and its loose adaptation Apocalypse Now.
George Lucas wrote the prologue to the novel, and Jonathan Davis reads the audiobook version.

Windu's former Padawan and fellow Jedi Master Depa Billaba has been sent to Windu's homeworld, Haruun Kal, to start a revolution against the Separatist-allied government.
Evidence is discovered that Billaba has fallen to the dark side of the Force.
Since Windu taught her a special lightsaber combat form, he alone is sent by the Jedi Council to find her.

After a fight, he puts Billaba under arrest, and calls a Republic cruiser.
It is attacked by Vulture droids and deploys gunships, which battle the droid starfighters with the assistance of clone troopers.
Some of the landing craft make it to the surface, and the cruiser defeats the Separatists.
Windu uses the gunships to destroy the droid fighters that followed them, then orders the clones to take out a nearby droid control station.
The Separatists are forced to surrender to the Republic, and Billaba falls into a vegetative coma.
A Republic force stays on the planet to police the unrestful local tribes.

The novel explores Windu's unique talent of sensing "shatterpoints", faultlines in the Force which allow him to exploit his enemies' weaknesses.
It also explains that Windu is the creator and sole master of a style of lightsaber combat called Vaapad, in which the user skirts dangerously close to the dark side by enjoying the thrill of the fight.
All others who attempted to master the form either gave in to the dark side or were unable to properly master the technique.
Stover later referenced Windu's unique lightsaber-fighting abilities in his novelization of Revenge of the Sith.
Vaapad was also acknowledged in the 2010 reference book The Jedi Path.

==
Merchandising ==
A Mace Windu action figure was added to the Star Wars Transformers toy line in 2006.
It was a remold of the toy first used for Obi-Wan Kenobi.
He becomes an Eta-2 Actis-class light interceptor starfighter with Astromech droid R4-M6.
==
Legacy ==
IGN listed Mace Windu as the 27th top Star Wars character, stating that he is an important component of the series.
Samuel L. Jackson called for Windu's return at Star Wars Celebration in 2017, saying that "We all know Jedi can fall from incredible heights and survive, so apparently, I am not dead.
Yes, I have two appendages right now, but we know the long and rich history of Star Wars characters reappearing with new appendages".

==
Relationships ==


===
Mentorship tree ===


==
Further reading ==
Star Wars Episode III: Revenge of the Sith Novelization – Novelization, 1st edition hardcover, 2005.
Matthew Woodring Stover, George Lucas, ISBN 0-7126-8427-1
Shatterpoint (novel), 1st edition, 2003.
Matthew Woodring Stover, ISBN 0-345-45573-8
The New Essential Guide to Characters, 1st edition, 2002.
Daniel Wallace, Michael Sutfin, ISBN 0-345-44900-2
Star Wars:
The Phantom Menace: The Visual Dictionary, hardcover, 1999.
David West Reynolds, ISBN 0-7894-4701-0
Star Wars:
Attack of the Clones: The Visual Dictionary, hardcover, 2002.
David West Reynolds, ISBN 0-7894-8588-5
Revised Core Rulebook (Star Wars Roleplaying Game), 1st edition, 2002.
Bill Slavicsek, Andy Collins, J.D. Wiker, Steve Sansweet, ISBN 0-7869-2876-X
Star Wars Roleplaying Game: Power of the Jedi Sourcebook, hardcover, 2002.
Michael Mikaelian, Jeff Grubb, Owen K.C. Stephens, James Maliszewski, ISBN
0-7869-2781-X
Star Wars Galaxy Guide 7:
Mos Eisley, softcover, 1993.
Martin Wixted, ISBN 0-87431-187-X


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Mace Windu in the StarWars.com Databank
Mace Windu on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Darth Bane is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise.
He was created by George Lucas, within the Star Wars canon where he is first mentioned in the novelization of Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace, where Bane is an ancient Sith Lord who lived a thousand years before the films, and is known for being the originator of the "Rule of Two" that the Sith Lords follow, which establishes: "A master and an apprentice can be the only Sith in the galaxy at one time", which still remains as his backstory.
Darth Bane's only on-screen appearance happens when he appears as a ghost to Jedi master Yoda in the animated series Star Wars:
The Clone Wars, voiced by Mark Hamill (who portrays Luke Skywalker in the films).

In 2014, when Lucasfilm officially rebranded the Star Wars expanded universe as Star Wars Legends, and declared it non-canon to the franchise, all of his other appearances, including the comic book series Jedi vs. Sith and the novels Darth Bane: Path of Destruction, Darth Bane: Rule of Two and Darth Bane: Dynasty of Evil, ceased to be canon, leaving his only canonical appearance the cameo in Star Wars:
The Clone Wars.
==
Character overview ==
In the Star Wars universe, Darth Bane is an extremely powerful Sith Lord who lived a millennium before the events of Episode I: The Phantom Menace.
The character was created in the script for Episode I and first mentioned in the novelization of the film.
In both instances, he was established as the originator of the Sith "Rule of Two", which states: "A master and an apprentice can be the only Sith in the galaxy at one time", before which the sith empire was structured like the Jedi but due to its shortfalls he created this new rule.
The Rule of Two is mentioned by Yoda, but the part where he mentioned Darth Bane was cut from the film.
The Rule of Two philosophy would aid Palpatine in taking over the galaxy a thousand years later in Episode III: Revenge of the Sith.

==
Appearances ==


===
Television ===


====
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars ====
In the television series Star Wars: The Clone Wars sixth season, Darth Bane appears as an apparition to Yoda on the Sith home planet Moraband.
He is voiced by Mark Hamill, who portrayed Luke Skywalker in the films.
Prior to taking on the role of Bane, Hamill did not know of the character or how Bane fit into the overall arc of Star Wars.
His son Nathan knew about the history of the character, however, and was able to explain it to his father once he took on the role.
For the portrayal, Dave Filoni recorded Hamill reading his lines using multiple inflections, each portraying different emotions, and then blended all together into the version heard within the episode.
Previous to that appearance, the developers of the show had considered and rejected for Darth Bane to appear during the third season's Mortis Trilogy arc alongside Darth Revan, acting as an influence on the Son (an embodiment of the dark side).
For now, this serves as Bane's only canon appearance.

===
Legends ===
With the 2012 acquisition of Lucasfilm by The Walt Disney Company, most of the licensed Star Wars novels and comics produced since the originating 1977 film Star Wars were rebranded as Star Wars Legends and declared non-canon to the franchise in April 2014.

==== Path of Destruction and Jedi vs. Sith ====
Darth Bane's backstory is established in Darth Bane: Path of Destruction by Drew Karpyshyn.
He is born as Dessel on the planet Apatros, the son of a miner named Hurst.
An abusive alcoholic, Hurst blames the boy for the death of his wife in childbirth, and often calls him the "Bane" of his existence.

Bane's father takes him into the mines at a young age where the boy is bullied and abused well into adulthood.
With his latent affinity in the dark side of the Force, Bane subconsciously uses this power to kill his father in his sleep.

After he kills a Republic Navy ensign in self-defense, Bane flees Apatros to evade arrest, and joins the armies of the Brotherhood of Darkness, an amassing of Sith Lords and acolytes.
His instinctive use of the Force (which he initially believes to be a myth) brings him to the attention of the Sith Lord Kopecz.
Dessel is sent to the Brotherhood's Academy on Korriban to be trained in the ways of the dark side.
Dessel (who renames himself Bane) becomes a star pupil after killing another student in cold blood.
In particular, he attracts the attention of Sirak, the top student at the Korriban Academy.

After Bane realizes that he had indeed killed his father with the dark side, he subconsciously retreats from the Force, losing his power.
Bane falls out of favor in the Academy, and is eventually refused any personalized training.
Months later, in a vain attempt to reestablish himself, Bane challenges Sirak to a fight and is seriously injured in the ensuing duel.

Bane's training in and ascension to the Sith is detailed in both Path of Destruction and Jedi vs. Sith.
As a student, he meets a new apprentice (and former Jedi) named Githany, who secretly plans to use him to bring down Sirak.
Githany reestablishes his connection to the dark side by showing him in secret what the Sith Lords are teaching her.
Most importantly, and to the dismay of the instructors, Bane studies tomes from the Golden Age of the Sith.
He soon realizes that the Brotherhood's teachings are incomplete.

Githany tells Bane that she intends to challenge Sirak, assuming that Bane would offer to assassinate him to spare her.
However, Bane surprises her by revealing his intentions to destroy Sirak personally in the dueling ring, and that he had known all along she was using him.
During the duel, he seriously wounds his opponent, but stops just short of killing him.

Qordis, the main Sith there, knows of his secret training with Githany.
He tells him so, and ends up angering Bane.
Bane leaves the academy, hoping to find the secrets of ancient Sith Masters in the Valley of the Dark Lords on Korriban.
To his disappointment, however, he finds nothing.
He returns to the academy, where Githany lures him to the archives, apparently intending to kill him.
When the trap comes to fruition, however, Bane realizes that the trap is actually meant for Sirak.
Githany kills Sirak's henchmen, and Bane defeats and kills his old nemesis in a lightsaber duel.

Bane takes the long-abandoned Sith title of Darth, leaves the Brotherhood, and travels to Rakata Prime.
There, he discovers a Sith Holocron left behind by Darth Revan.
Bane completes his training, learning numerous Sith techniques, including the "thought bomb" designed to kill all Force-sensitive beings in reach.
He sends this to Lord Kaan.
Bane then devises the "Rule of Two": only two Sith Lords, a master and an apprentice, are allowed to exist at one time ("One to embody power and one to crave it.")

Kaan orders that all of the students on Korriban be made into Lords and brought to battle on Ruusan.
Kaan sends Kas'im to bring Bane back to Ruusan to join the Brotherhood on pain of death.
Upon meeting his former teacher, Bane considers taking him as an apprentice, but ultimately kills him after being refused.
Afterwards, Bane takes it upon himself to destroy the remaining Sith and take on an apprentice to carry on the Sith legacy after him.

Bane sends a staged message to Kaan asking to join the Brotherhood; Githany volunteers to kill Bane.
Unknown to Githany, Bane had also sent the thought bomb, supposedly as a token of goodwill.
Githany finds Bane, and pretends to accept his offer to join the Brotherhood.
Githany slipped him poison in a kiss, and he is rendered violently ill.
Barely alive, Bane eventually finds a healer named Caleb and extorts his help by threatening his daughter.
Caleb cures Bane of the poison and nurses him back to health.

Bane returns to Ruusan, where Kaan agrees to follow his lead in battle.
During meditation, Bane uses his own body and power as a focusing agent to unleash a wave of destruction upon the forests of Ruusan, where the Jedi's Army of light is hiding.
When the other Sith Lords mutiny, Bane orders the commander of the space forces to engage the Jedi fleet.
Realizing he is facing defeat, Kaan retreats to some caves with the other Sith Lords.
When the thought bomb detonates, it destroys the Jedi and Sith armies, including Kaan, Githany, and the leader of the Jedi Army of Light, Jedi Master Hoth.

In both Jedi vs. Sith and the end of Path of Destruction, Bane meets a Force-sensitive young girl named Rain, who had been brought to Ruusan by the Jedi.
Rain had been travelling with her friend Laa, a native of Ruusan, called a "Bouncer", and had saved Laa from being warped by the Sith destruction to Ruusan.
Laa is shot dead by two Jedi troops, because every other Bouncer they had encountered after the destruction caused by Bane and the other Sith had been driven mad.
As Bane watches, Rain unintentionally draws on the dark side out of anger and kills the two Jedi soldiers.
Bane realizes Rain's potential, and accepts her as his apprentice, Darth Zannah.

====
Darth Bane: Rule of Two ====
In Darth Bane: Rule of Two, Darth Bane goes to Onderon's moon, Dxun, to scavenge an ancient Sith temple.
He leaves Zannah with her first mission: to find her way to Onderon in 10 days by her own cunning and strategy.
Bane finds his objective: Freedon Nadd's holocron.
During the quest, however, parasites called orbalisks cover his body.
He uses the holocron to gain further knowledge of the dark side, as well as information on the orbalisks.
He learns that Nadd faced the same problem with the orbalisks, so the Dark Lord before him created a suit that would stop them growing on his face, hands and feet.
Meanwhile, his apprentice sabotages a Republic craft and lands in an unknown strip of land which belongs to Dxun's infamous beast Riders.
She nearly dies in the attempt, but Bane saves her.
Then, the pair goes into hiding on Ambria, establishing illegal contacts through the galaxy through the use of an information broker.
Over the next decade, Zannah acts as Bane's lieutenant, carrying out his orders as she grows stronger in the dark side.
He orders her to coerce secession movements to move against the Republic too early; the secessionists are subsequently crushed, both removing threats to the Sith's power and deflecting attention off of the two Sith lords.

After a botched assassination attempt against the Chancellor, Zannah discovers a dark side user, Hetton, who has uncovered the location of a tomb of an ancient Sith on the Deep Core planet of Tython.
It is rumored that this tomb contains a Holocron with the key that Bane needs to produce his own.
After killing the pseudo Sith, Bane and Zannah set off on their respective  missions: to recover the ancient Holocron, and infiltrate the Jedi Archives for information on removing the orbalisks.

Upon arrival on Tython and entering the tomb, Bane is attacked by scores of technobeasts, creations of the ancient Sith to guard her crypt.
He eventually defeats them and successfully recovers the Holocron.
Zannah is able to obtain the information she needs, but her cover is blown at the last minute by her cousin Tomcat, now a healer in the care of the Jedi.
Realizing she will need him to remove the orbalisks, she takes him hostage and heads for Tython, with the Jedi on their trail.

Once Zannah and Tomcat arrive on Tython and warn Bane, they retreat to the interior of the temple, waiting for the attack.
When it finally comes, the two sides are evenly matched, despite the Sith being outnumbered.
When Bane is about to unleash an attack on the last remaining Jedi, his opponent suspends a Force Shield around him.
The lightning bounces off the interior of the shield and cooks Bane alive for seconds, melting his flesh and causing the orbalisk to burrow further into his flesh, resulting in unbearable pain.
Bane blacks out and is almost killed by the Jedi, but Zannah saves her master and brings him to Ambria, dragging Tomcat along.

Once there, Tomcat (aka Darovit) creates an agreement between Zannah and Caleb (the healer who helped Bane in the previous novel) designed to ensure their survival.
Caleb heals Bane under the assurance that Bane will be arrested and imprisoned by the Jedi Council long before Bane is strong enough to fight back.
Darovit then sends a message drone containing their location's coordinates to the Jedi.
Also, he disables their ship to ensure that the Sith cannot escape.
After several days, Bane awakens, infuriated when he hears that his apprentice has sent a message alerting the Jedi to their presence.
Begging her to kill him, he over-exerts himself and passes out again.
Zannah kills Caleb and disables Tomcat with a Sith spell of madness.
She then hides herself and her Master in a secret compartment under Caleb's bed.
When the Jedi arrive, Tomcat attacks them in his delusional state, and he is killed.
Finding no other living beings, the Jedi assume they have finally killed the last of the Sith.
Zannah nurses Bane back to health — even as she pledges to kill him when her training is complete —
and they go back into hiding.

====
Darth Bane: Dynasty of Evil ====
Ten years later, Darth Bane and Zannah are living on Ciutric IV, disguised as merchants.
Bane is growing older and weaker, but Zannah has not yet made any attempt to confront him.
Fearing that she is too weak to pursue his legacy, he starts to search for the lost knowledge of Darth Andeddu, a Dark Lord of the Sith who harbored the secret of eternal life.
When Bane discovers that a clue to the secret can be found on the planet Prakith, he distracts Zannah by sending her to Doan to investigate the death of a Jedi Knight.

Zannah knows that, despite his frail appearance, Bane is tremendously powerful and that his frailty might be a trap to lure her into attacking him.
Zannah also knows that, if she was to defeat Bane and take on the mantle of the Dark Lord of the Sith, she would need an apprentice of her own.
During her investigations on Doan, she meets a Dark Jedi named Set Harth who collects Sith artifacts.
After a brief duel, which Set loses, Zannah takes him on as her apprentice.

Meanwhile, Bane arrives on Prakith through a series of hazardous micro-jumps into the Deep Core.
He storms Andeddu's temple, which is inhabited by a cult called the Malevolence, and easily recovers the Dark Lord's holocron.
On the trip back, Bane is frustrated by the holocron's gatekeeper's stalling and forcefully uses his power to "hack" the holocron, discovering Darth Andeddu's technique of essence transfer, the ability to transfer one's consciousness into another's body.
Armed with this knowledge, Bane returns to Ciutric IV expecting to confront Zannah.

During these course of events, Serra, Princess of Doan, discovers that her father has been killed and suspects Bane's survival.
She hires an assassin known as the Huntress to capture Bane.
On Ciutric IV, the Huntress and a group of mercenaries ambushes Bane, and manages to incapacitate him by a potent nerve poison supplied by Serra's healer knowledge.

While in captivity in the Stone Prison on Doan, Bane is tortured by Serra as revenge for the death of her father.
However, Serra's bodyguard and best friend, Lucia, recognizes Bane as Des, commander of the Gloom Walkers who saved her squad multiple times during the Sith Wars.
Lucia secretly counteracts the poison restraining Bane, and he successfully breaks out.
However, Bane also senses that Zannah had tracked him to Doan and attempts to elude because of his weakened state.
Bane runs into Lucia, but their reunion is cut short when Zannah arrives and engages Bane in a duel.
Lucia is killed as collateral damage.
Despite being weakened and unarmed, Bane is able to hold his own against Zannah.

Serra is initially hesitant about activating the self-destruct system for the prison, but upon discovering Lucia's death, she promptly activates the system.
Bane manages to escape from Zannah, and each attempt to escape on different shuttles.
Prior to this, Set, who accompanied Zannah, tracks down the aura of Darth Andeddu's holocron among Bane's confiscated possessions.
He attempts to escape, but he is waylaid by the Huntress in the shuttle bay.
He manages to evade her and escape on a shuttle.
The Huntress then encounters Bane, and pledges to become his next apprentice, offering him back his lightsaber and holocron which she stole from his estate.

Bane and the Huntress, now renamed Darth Cognus, follows Serra back to Ambria near Caleb's cottage.
The princess, who has now learned to let go of her hatred, calmly awaits Bane and allows Cognus to kill her.
Bane then sends a message to Zannah directing her to Ambria to finish their duel.

Zannah arrives and they restart their duel, with Bane now armed.
Zannah now knows that she cannot best Bane in combat, so she resolves to utilize her specialty of Sith sorcery.
Their fight progresses with Bane pressuring Zannah until Zannah unleashes a mind attack.
Bane powers through her illusions, but Zannah reveals her trump card and summons sentient tentacles of pure dark side energy.
Bane evades them and rushes Zannah, but his final blow is cut short by a tentacle severing the arm holding his lightsaber.
As a last resort, he invokes Darth Andeddu's essence transfer technique to possess Zannah.
His body is destroyed as a side effect of the technique and the two fight a battle of wills within Zannah's body.
The fight ends and it is unclear who is the victor.
Zannah proclaims : "Darth Bane is gone.
I am Darth Zannah, Dark Lord of the Sith and your new Master".
Cognus approaches Zannah and proclaims her loyalty to the new Sith Master, as her apprentice.
Still, Cognus cannot help but notice as Zannah speaks she was continually clenching and unclenching the fingers of her left hand.
Bane's method of halting the tremors that plagued his old body.
Bane's essence remains.

In some unknown place, Set has activated Darth Andeddu's holocron and plans to obtain immortality.

====
Legacy ====
Bane is also featured in Star Wars: Legacy and Legacy:
Shards, set 130 years after Return of the Jedi.
In "Shards", Darth Bane appears with two other long-dead Sith Lords, Darth Nihilus and Darth Andeddu, in a vision to the series' chief villain, Darth Krayt.
Bane condemns Krayt for taking more than one apprentice, and prophesies that Krayt's new Sith Empire will collapse when his followers turn on themselves, since his "One Sith" philosophy isn't an improvement on the Rule of Two.
==
Relationships ==


===
Mentorship tree ===


==
References ==


===
Inline citations ===


===
General references ===
Episode
I:
The Phantom Menace, 1st edition paperback, 1999.
Terry Brooks, George Lucas, ISBN 0-345-43411-0
The Dark Side sourcebook, Wizards of the Coast, 1st printing, 2001.
Bill Slavicsek, J. D. Wiker, ISBN 0-7869-1849-7
The New Essential Guide to Characters, 1st edition, 2002.
Daniel Wallace, Michael Sutfin, ISBN 0-345-44900-2
Episode III: Revenge of the Sith - Novelisation, 1st edition hardcover, 2005.
Matthew Woodring Stover, George Lucas, ISBN 0-7126-8427-1
The New Essential Star Wars Chronology
Darth Bane: Path of Destruction, 1st edition hardcover, 2006.
Drew Karpyshyn, ISBN 0-345-47736-7
Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed video game for Xbox 360 & PlayStation 3 - downloadable skin.

==
External links ==
Darth Bane in the StarWars.com Databank
Darth Bane on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Count Dooku is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise, created by George Lucas.
One of the main antagonists of the Star Wars prequel trilogy, he appears in both Episode II – Attack of the Clones (2002) and Episode III – Revenge of the Sith (2005), played by Christopher Lee, as well as associated media, such as books, comics, television series, and video games.
The character is voiced by Corey Burton in animated series Star Wars: Clone Wars (2003-2005) and The Clone Wars (2008-2020), while Lee reprised the role in the 2008 animated film that launched the latter series.

In the Star Wars universe, Dooku is the ruler of his home planet of Serenno, a political enthusiast, and a former Jedi Master, who was trained by Yoda and mentored Qui-Gon Jinn.
After becoming disillusioned with the corruption within the Galactic Republic's Senate and losing his faith in the Jedi Order, he eventually falls to the dark side of the Force and becomes Darth Sidious' second apprentice after Darth Maul, as the Sith Lord Darth Tyranus.
Dooku plays a pivotal role in Sidious' rise to power, leading the Confederacy of Independent Systems, made up of numerous planetary systems seeking independence from the Republic, throughout the Clone Wars, and engineering the creation of the clone army used by the Republic in their conflict with the Separatist Alliance.
Although Dooku hopes this will allow him to rule the galaxy alongside Sidious, whom he secretly plots to overthrow, he is ultimately betrayed by his master, who arranges his death at the hands of his eventual replacement, Anakin Skywalker.

Count Dooku's character and Christopher Lee's portrayal in the prequel films were met with generally positive reviews.
Dooku has been highlighted as one of the greatest Star Wars villains of all time, and a foil for Anakin Skywalker, whose transformation into Darth Vader is foreshadowed through Dooku's own fall to the dark side.
The character has also become very popular among the Star Wars fanbase, gaining a cult following.

==
Portrayal ==
Count Dooku was portrayed by Sir Christopher Lee in Attack of the Clones and Revenge of the Sith, while Kyle Rowling performed the lightsaber action sequences.
Lee also voiced the character in the 2008 animated film, but was replaced by Corey Burton in the subsequent TV series.
Burton had previously voiced Dooku in the 2003 micro-series Star Wars: Clone Wars, and went on to voice him in most of his video game appearances; most recently, Star Wars: Battlefront II (2017).

==
Appearances ==


===
Films ===


====
Attack of the Clones ====
Count Dooku is introduced Star Wars: Episode II – Attack of the Clones as a former Jedi Master who abandoned the Order after losing faith in their traditions and the Jedi Council's judgement.
He is also the leader of the Confederacy of Independent Systems, a federation of planetary systems rebelling against the Galactic Republic.
Dooku says that the Republic is corrupt, and that its politicians are more interested in maintaining the bureaucracy and enriching themselves than in helping poor, oppressed systems.

Dooku recruits bounty hunter Jango Fett (Temuera Morrison) to assassinate Padmé Amidala (Natalie Portman) on Coruscant; the attempt on her life fails, however.
When a fight with Obi-Wan Kenobi (Ewan McGregor) forces Fett to flee from Kamino to Geonosis, the bounty hunter rendezvous with his benefactor.
After capturing Obi-Wan on Geonosis, Dooku tells him that he is attempting to save the Republic, explaining that thousands of senators are under the influence of a Sith Lord named Darth Sidious.
When Obi-Wan refuses to join him, Dooku reminds him of his late master, Qui-Gon Jinn, who was Dooku's apprentice and shared many of his views on politics and Jedi traditions.
Padmé and Obi-Wan's Padawan Anakin Skywalker (Hayden Christensen) later travel to Geonosis to save Obi-Wan, but are also captured, and all three are promptly sentenced to death.

A Jedi strike team eventually arrives on the planet to rescue the trio, and they are soon joined by the Republic's new clone army, resulting in a large-scale battle between the Republic and Separatist forces.
Dooku tries to flee, but Obi-Wan and Anakin follow him  and engage him in a lightsaber duel.
Dooku subdues Anakin with a blast of Force lightning and wounds
Obi-Wan with his lightsaber.
When Anakin comes to Obi-Wan's defense, Dooku cuts off the young Padawan's arm.
Just as Dooku is about to escape, his old Jedi Master, Yoda (Frank Oz), arrives and duels him.
Unable to match Yoda's speed and agility, Dooku distracts him by using the Force to dislodge a large pillar and send it hurtling toward Anakin and Obi-Wan.
While Yoda is busy saving them, Dooku escapes.
After he arrives on Coruscant, Dooku shows the Geonosian designs of the Death Star to Sidious and informs his master that their plan is working: "The war has begun."
====
Revenge of the Sith ====
In the opening of Star Wars: Episode III – Revenge of the Sith, set three years later, Dooku and Separatist commander General Grievous (Matthew Wood) have kidnapped Supreme Chancellor Palpatine (Ian McDiarmid) — Sidious' alter ego— as part of a plan orchestrated by Palpatine to lure Anakin to the dark side of the Force.
Anakin and Obi-Wan board Grievous' ship and confront Dooku, who knocks Obi-Wan unconscious, leaving Anakin to face the Sith Lord alone.
Anakin gives in to his hatred of Dooku and uses the dark side to overpower him, severing both of Dooku's hands and leaving him helpless.
Palpatine then tells Anakin to execute Dooku on the spot; after initial hesitation, Anakin brutally decapitates Dooku.
This act sets off a chain of events that leads to Anakin's eventual fall to the dark side and transformation into Darth Vader, thus succeeding Dooku as Sidious' third apprentice and accomplishing what Dooku couldn't: helping Sidious eliminate the Jedi Order and form the Galactic Empire.
====
The Clone Wars (film) ====
In the 2008 CGI film Star Wars: The Clone Wars, Count Dooku plots to bring Jabba the Hutt into the folds of the Confederacy by enlisting Jabba's uncle Ziro the Hutt to kidnap Jabba's son Rotta.
After Ziro's agents deliver the Huttlet to the planet Teth, Dooku contacts Ziro again to arrange for his minion Asajj Ventress
(voiced by Nika Futterman) to take custody of Rotta.
When Jabba requests Jedi assistance to rescue his son, Dooku plans to frame the Jedi for the crime.
Dooku duels Anakin (voiced by Matt Lanter) for the first time since their encounter in Attack of the Clones.
The duel ends in a draw, and Anakin and his Padawan Ahsoka Tano (Ashley Eckstein) eventually foil Dooku's plan.
===
Television ===


====
The Clone Wars ====
In the 2008 animated series Star Wars: The Clone Wars, set in between Attack Of The Clones and Revenge Of The Sith, Dooku is the puppet leader of the Separatists, and a primary antagonist.
In addition to sending Grievous and Ventress on missions to antagonize the Republic, he works with the terrorist group Death Watch to give the Republic a reason to send a military presence to Mandalore, which would play in his favor.
The plan falls through when Duchess Satine Kryze (Anna Graves) of Mandalore urges the Galactic Senate to hold off a military force.

In the third season, Dooku is forced to eliminate his apprentice Ventress to prove his loyalty to Darth Sidious.
Ventress survives, however, and works with Mother Talzin (Barbara Goodson) to kill Dooku by giving him Savage Opress (Clancy Brown) as a replacement apprentice.
During a confrontation between Dooku and Ventress, Savage turns on both.
In the fourth season, Dooku defeats Anakin in three separate lightsaber duels, and gets his revenge on Ventress by having General Grievous order the systematic genocide of the Nightsisters.
In the fifth season, Dooku plays minor roles via hologram in guiding King Rash of Onderon and Grievous taking over Florrum.

In the sixth season, Dooku finds out the clone trooper Tup executed Order 66 prematurely and works behind the scenes to stop the Republic's investigation.
He then manipulates the Banking Clan and its representative Rush Clovis (Robin Atkin Downes) into putting all their resources in the hands of the Sith, bringing war to the planet Scipio.
Later, the Jedi find a lightsaber belonging to deceased Jedi Master Sifo-Dyas—whom Dooku murdered years earlier—and start an investigation.
Sidious forces Dooku to clean up their trail.
Dooku confronts Anakin and Obi-Wan on Oba Diah, revealing his alter-ego Darth Tyranus to the Jedi, and they realize that it was he who created the clone army.
Some further investigation by Yoda prompts Dooku and Sidious to perform a Sith ritual in an unsuccessful attempt to break the Jedi Master; in a vision experienced by Yoda, Dooku fights Anakin, who swiftly defeats and executes him, in a manner very similar to his eventual demise.

Count Dooku does not directly appear in the seventh season.
However, as the events of Revenge of the Sith are concurrent with the season's final arc, Ahsoka Tano is informed of his demise at Anakin's hands by Obi-Wan, who tells her that it is important to capture Maul, being the only way the Jedi can discover the true identity of Darth Sidious after Dooku's death.

===
Novels ===
In the audiobook Dooku: Jedi Lost by Cavan Scott, Dooku meets his sister Jenza, brother Ramil, and father Count Gora, when he visits his homeworld of Serenno as a Jedi Initiate.
Dooku begins corresponding with Jenza, keeping their communications a secret for years.
The audiobook also details several adventures Dooku has with his best friend, Sifo-Dyas, and Dyas's Jedi Master, Lene Kostana.
During one mission, Dooku sees visions of many different futures through the Force, which shake him to the core.
Eventually, Dooku becomes a Jedi Knight, trains two Padawans to knighthood, and joins the Jedi Council, hoping to bring about real change in the Republic.
However, after he saves his homeworld of Serenno from invaders, he decides to remain to help his planet rebuild, leaving the Jedi Order and becoming Count Dooku of Serenno.
The novel Master & Apprentice by Claudia Gray recounts several adventures from Qui-Gon Jinn's apprenticeship under Dooku, as well as Dooku's obsession with Jedi prophecies and seeming use of Force Lightning during a mission.
The novel also reveals that Dooku had one other apprentice before Qui-Gon, Rael Averross.

===
Star Wars: Legends ===
Dooku appears extensively in the Star Wars Expanded Universe, including novels, comic books and the 2003 TV series Star Wars: Clone Wars.
In 2014, Lucasfilm labeled such material non-canon to the franchise, and rebranded them as Star Wars: Legends.

====
Comic books ====
In the Star Wars: Republic series, set during the Clone Wars, Dooku trains multiple Dark Jedi apprentices, most of whom he uses as minions.
His apprentices include Ventress, Tol Skorr and renegade Jedi Quinlan Vos.
Vos initially intended to infiltrate the Separatists as a spy for the Jedi Council but instead nearly falls to the dark side.

====
Novels ====
In Jude Watson's Legacy of the Jedi, Dooku appears in Parts 1, 2, and 4, and is mentioned in Part 3.
In Part 1, he is first tempted by the dark side of the Force as a child when his best friend and fellow Padawan Lorian Nod steals an ancient Sith Holocron from the Jedi Archives.
When Nod is caught, Nod lies and says that the theft was Dooku's idea.
However, Dooku manages to convince the Jedi Council of the truth, and Nod is then expelled from the Jedi Order.
It is later implied that Dooku himself steals the Holocron because he is intrigued by the Sith's open embrace of power and realizes that he is just as ruthless as they are.
Nod's treachery leaves Dooku with a great bitterness and intolerance of any form of betrayal, as well as an even more pronounced coldness to strangers.
In Part 2, set 13 years later, he is a Jedi Knight, and takes Qui-Gon Jinn as his Padawan apprentice.
By now, he is capable of masking emotions such as anger and hate that the Jedi Code forbids, stating that they in fact make him stronger.
He encounters Nod while defending a Senator from space pirates, and defeats him in combat, almost executing him.
However, Qui-Gon convinces him to spare Nod's life, and he and Dooku turn Nod over to the authorities.
In Part 3, set 32 years later, Qui-Gon, now a Jedi Knight, remarks that he has not seen Dooku in years, noting that their relationship was never friendly.
Finally in Part 4, set in the midst of the Clone Wars, Dooku, now a Sith, kills Nod after his former friend refuses to join the Separatists.

In Sean Stewart's Yoda: Dark Rendezvous, Dooku attempts to trap Yoda by offering to negotiate an end to the Clone Wars.
Dooku attempts unsuccessfully to sway Yoda to his cause, while Yoda nearly convinces Dooku to return to the Jedi Order.
When Anakin and Obi-Wan appear unexpectedly, Dooku believes that Yoda was trying to set him up to be captured, and renounces his former master once and for all.
In the novel, it is also revealed that Dooku always resented his parents for "giving him away" to the Jedi Order.

In James Luceno's Labyrinth of Evil, Dooku engineers
Grievous' transformation into a cyborg and trains him in lightsaber combat.
He then schemes with Sidious to invade Coruscant in what he believes to be a plot to kill Obi-Wan and initiate Anakin into the Sith.

Matthew Stover's novelization of Revenge of the Sith expands upon Dooku's character: it portrays him as an evil man who has no concept of loyalty or friendship, and who despises the galaxy's non-human species.
It also explains that Dooku believes that Palpatine's staged kidnapping is part of a plan to kill Obi-Wan and recruit Anakin into the Galactic Empire as the commander of its army, while Dooku and Palpatine will rule the galaxy together.
The novelization depicts Dooku's death scene from his point of view; in his final moments, he realizes that Palpatine used him as a means to engineer the war and as a placeholder for Anakin, whom he intended to be his apprentice all along.

====
Star Wars:
Clone Wars ====
During the 2003 animated miniseries Star Wars: Clone Wars, Count Dooku leads the Separatists from behind the scenes, taking the Dark Jedi Asajj Ventress (voiced by Grey DeLisle) as his apprentice while training General Grievous in lightsaber combat.
In the final episode, he and Grievous kidnap Palpatine, setting the stage for Revenge of the Sith.

===
Toys ===
A number of toys based on Count Dooku have been produced, including the Lego set Lego Star Wars: Duel on Geonosis which recreates the duel between Yoda and Dooku portrayed in Attack of the Clones, and a Hasbro Count Dooku lightsaber.

==
Relationships ==


===
Mentorship tree ===


==
References ==
BibliographyStover, Mathew.
Revenge of the Sith.
Lucas Booka, Century, London.
ISBN 0-7126-8427-1Notes
Further readingsThe New Essential Guide to Characters, 1st edition, 2002.
Daniel Wallace, Michael Sutfin, ISBN 0-345-44900-2
Reynolds, David West.
Star Wars: Attack of the Clones: The Visual Dictionary, hardcover, 2002.
ISBN 0
-7894-8588-5
Luceno, James.
Star Wars: Revenge of the Sith: The Visual Dictionary, hardcover, 2005.
,
ISBN 0-7566-1128-8
Slavicsek, Bill & Collins, Andy.
Star Wars Roleplaying Game:
Revised Core Rulebook, hardcover, 2002.
,
ISBN 0-7869-2876-X


==
External links ==
Count Dooku in the StarWars.com Databank
Count Dooku/Darth Tyranus on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Count Dooku on IMDb
The Armorer is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise who appears in the Disney+ television series The Mandalorian.
Dressed in red body armor and a gold helmet, she is the leader of a tribe of Mandalorian warriors, which includes the show's title character.
A mysterious, patient, and intelligent character, the Armorer provides spiritual guidance for the clan, and forges and repairs their armor.

Jon Favreau, the creator and showrunner of The Mandalorian, was among the creators of the Armorer.
The character was partially inspired by the films of Akira Kurosawa, as well as the history and culture of the samurai, particularly in the character's slow-paced movement and aura of authority.
The Armorer is portrayed by Emily Swallow, who provides both the character's voice and live-action performance, while her stunts are performed by Lauren Mary Kim.
When Swallow auditioned for the role, she knew little about the character and did not know it was for a Star Wars series.

The voice Swallow uses for the Armorer has elements of British and Mid-Atlantic accents, which stemmed from a suggestion made by a casting associate during her audition.
She also partially modeled the Armorer's voice after characters from the Lord of the Rings film series.
Aspects of The Mandalorian director Deborah Chow's personality influenced Swallow's performance.
Kim's combat style in the Armorer's fight scenes was inspired by the Filipino martial art known as Kali.

The Armorer's costume took several weeks to make, and it proved to be challenging to perform in due to limited visibility and the fact that small movements in the costume were very noticeable.
Swallow wore the helmet and armor costume for up to nine hours at a time during filming.
The Armorer has been received positively by fans and reviewers alike, and has been described as a fan favorite.

== Appearances ==
The Armorer appeared in three episodes in the first season of The Mandalorian.
She is the leader of a tribe of Mandalorian warriors on the planet Nevarro, where they live in a secret enclave.
She provides spiritual guidance for the clan, and forges and repairs their armor.
Little is revealed about her backstory, and, like other Mandalorians, she wears highly durable armor and conceals her face with a helmet that she never publicly removes.
The Mandalorians are in hiding after having suffered persecution by the Galactic Empire, and although the Empire has fallen out of power by the time of The Mandalorian, the clan has not yet regained its former status or power.
The Armorer made her first appearance in the series premiere "Chapter 1: The Mandalorian".
The show's protagonist, a bounty hunter known simply as "The Mandalorian", brings her money he received from having collected his most recent bounties, including a bar of beskar steel, a very rare form of metal used to make Mandalorian armor.
The Armorer explains that the Empire stole the beskar from the Mandalorians during an event known as "The Great Purge".
She uses the beskar to make a single shoulder pauldron for the Mandalorian, and asks whether he has yet identified his "signet", a symbol used to identify clans of Mandalorians.
When he says that he has not, she assures him that he will soon.
The Armorer says the remaining beskar will be used to assist the "foundlings", a term for children who were not born Mandalorian but rather  adopted into their culture.
This pleases the Mandalorian because he was a foundling himself.
As the Armorer works on his armor, the Mandalorian has flashbacks to his youth, when his family was killed.
The Armorer reappears in the episode "Chapter 3: The Sin", in which the Mandalorian brings her a large amount of beskar, which he received as a bounty for collecting a young alien known as "The Child" and turning him over a remnant of the fallen Empire.
The Armorer uses the steel to make a full cuirass for him.
She also makes him a set of explosive projectiles called "whistling birds", named for the whistling noises they make as they fly toward their target.
Another clan member named Paz Vizla reprimands the Mandalorian for working with the Empire to obtain the beskar, which leads to a brief fight between the two warriors.
The Armorer quickly and quietly diffuses the quarrel, reminding them the Empire no longer exists and that it is good the beskar has been returned to the tribe.
She speaks about cowardice, honor, and the "Way of the Mandalore", which serves as the tribe's religion and creed.
Later, off-screen, the Mandalorians on Nevarro are largely wiped out by the Imperial remnant after the tribe reveals itself at the conclusion of "Chapter 3:
The Sin" to assist the Mandalorian.
The Armorer is one of the few members of the clan to survive.
In the first-season finale "Chapter 8: Redemption", the Mandalorian and his allies come to the Mandalorian enclave while fleeing from attacking Imperials, only to find it unoccupied except for the Armorer, following the elimination of most of the tribe.
The Armorer explains that some Mandalorian warriors may have survived and fled off-world.
She is collecting the armor of the fallen Mandalorian warriors and melting them down for salvage.
When the Mandalorian presents the Child and reveals he has supernatural powers, the Armorer tells him about the Jedi Order, of which most other characters in the show are not aware.
She speaks of the history of the Jedi warriors and their past associations with the Way of the Mandalore, sharing a story from "eons past" about a battle between the Jedi and
"Mandalore the Great", a mythological figure in Mandalorian culture.
This marks the first time the Jedi are identified by name in The Mandalorian.
The Armorer instructs the Mandalorian to watch over and protect the Child, who she calls a "foundling", like the Mandalorian once was himself.
She says honor demands that the Mandalorian seek out and deliver the Child to the others of his kind, and that until this occurs, the Mandalorian and the Child are a "clan of two", and that the Mandalorian will be like a father to him.
She engraves onto the Mandalorian's pauldron the likeness of a Mudhorn, a type of creature the Mandalorian and the Child worked together to kill in "Chapter 2:
The Child"; the Armorer declares it his signet.
She also gives the Mandalorian his first jet pack.
The Mandalorian invites the Armorer to flee with him, but she refuses to abandon the enclave until she has salvaged what remains.
When the Mandalorian and his allies depart, the Armorer waits until five Stormtroopers armed with blasters enter the enclave and attempt to question her.
Armed with nothing but her forging tools, the Armorer fights and kills all five in under a minute.

== Characterization ==
The Armorer is a mysterious and enigmatic character, with a calm and patient temperament, and a Zen-like personality.
She is very intelligent and knows how to act quickly in complex situations.
She observes what is happening around her and only speaks when necessary, and although she displays knowledge of many different things – from the Mandalorian's past to the history of the Jedi – she often does not reveal her knowledge until she believes the time is right.
Swallow said of this
: "she will reveal it in good time, but no one's going to get any information out of her without her being good and ready.
"
She is very slow-paced in her movements, and displays what Swallow calls a "simplicity [and] efficiency of movement".
The Armorer plays a relatively small role in the first season of The Mandalorian, but an important one, repeatedly setting the title character on the correct path of his hero's journey.
She is the leader of the Mandalorian tribe, providing guidance and direction to a clan that has lost its way after the Empire has persecuted them.
She does so by reminding them of their moral code and set of values, and encouraging them to regard each other as a family.
The Armorer is the first person in the series to say "This is the Way", which serves as a credo for the Mandalorian clan and is repeated throughout the first season.
She believes strongly in Mandalorian traditions, and is dedicated to ensuring the survival of her tribe, serving as their spiritual leader as well as armorer.
Although strong Mandalorian women had previously been featured on such animated series as Star Wars: The Clone Wars and Star Wars Rebels, Swallow felt the Armorer was the first female Star Wars character to serve as the "spiritual leader" in the same vein as Obi-Wan Kenobi and Yoda.
The Armorer is confident and comfortable in her leadership position, and conveys an unwavering authority with little effort.
Swallow said of this: "
One of the coolest things for me in playing her is trusting that she does have that authority without having to be very forceful at all.
"
This is illustrated by the way in which she breaks up a fight between Mandalorian warriors in "Chapter 3: The Sin" without raising her voice or physically interfering.
This also demonstrates that she is well-respected by the members of her tribe, which Comic Book Resources writer Narayan Liu said is particularly impressive because "in such a focused warrior society, it would conceivably take a lot to command the respect of one's comrades".
The Armorer's voice conveys a sense of authority, mystery, and sophistication, and Swallow said she enjoys the contrast between her educated accent and warrior lifestyle, saying: "There's just a lot of seeming contradictions about her that I love.
"
Swallow, as well as several reviewers, have noted that the fact that the tribe's armor is crafted by its leader, rather than a trade worker, speaks to the importance of armor and the warrior status in Mandalorian culture.
Liu wrote of this: "Who better to forge Mandalorian armor and weaponry than one with experience, who fully understands its importance to the Mandalorian culture in this hostile galaxy?"Swallow feels that through her creation and maintenance of the armor, the Armorer is effectively the keeper of their history and rituals, because "she actually has a record based on what it is that she's made".
That role is even more important at the time of The Mandalorian, Swallow said, since much of the Mandalorian society has been suppressed and destroyed by the Empire.
In addition to her expertise at foundry work
the Armorer is an excellent fighter, displaying great strength and speed as well as particularly honed skills with melee weapons, as seen in her fight with the stormtroopers in "Chapter 8: Redemption".
Since the character had been so quiet for much of the first season of The Mandalorian, Swallow believed it was a shock when she fights the stormtroopers as well as she does.
Liu argued that the Armorer was the most efficient fighter in the series, even more so than the Mandalorian or other fighter characters like Cara Dune.
Liu wrote: "None so far seem more suited to handle the hostility of the Empire and the merciless desert than the guiding hand to the Mandalorians, the Armorer, who, in the season finale, proved that she's the best of the best."
==
Concept and creation ==


===
Conception ===
Jon Favreau, the creator and showrunner of The Mandalorian, was among the creators of the Armorer.
Creation of the character, as well as other elements of the series, was influenced by the films of Japanese director Akira Kurosawa.
The Armorer in particular drew influence from the history and culture of the samurai, especially in the character's slow-paced movement, sense of ceremony, and aura of authority.
Favreau and others involved in the show debated what gender to establish for the character, and ultimately decided to make her a woman, but Swallow said they "didn't want to make it a big deal".
She said: "I think they just sort of felt like, 'Why not?'"
The animated series Star Wars
: The Clone Wars had also featured several strong female Mandalorian characters and leaders, which Swallow said may also have been a consideration in determining the Armorer's gender.

===
Portrayal ===
The Armorer is portrayed by actress Emily Swallow, who provides both the character's voice and live-action performance.
Her stunts were performed by Lauren Mary Kim, who was also the stunt performer for various other characters on The Mandalorian.
Swallow auditioned for the role, but she knew little about her character or the series at the time of her audition.
The character was described as having a recurring role on a Disney series, which was identified only by the code name "Untitled High Budget".
It was not disclosed that it was a Star Wars show, though Swallow's agent suspected that might be the case.
Swallow was given only a six-word description of the Armorer character in advance of the audition: "Leader.
Strong.
Zen, but with authority."
However, a casting associate at the audition gave her a little bit more backstory for the character, which Swallow said was helpful.
Although she said the audition itself was fairly "low-key" and "mundane", with only her and a single casting associate,  she was given only a handful of scenes to perform but little context about how they fit into the overall story of the show, which she described as "bizarre".
Swallow later reflected that it was good
she did not know it was a Star Wars project because she felt it would have made her more nervous, and instead she was able to approach the audition like any other.
The scene she read in her audition was a variation of the scene in "Chapter 3: The Sin" in which she breaks up a fight among members of the Mandalorian clan, though the final scene was changed slightly when adapted to television.
Her audition dialogue included the Armorer's line
"This is the Way", which would become one of the most popular lines of the series.
The casting company made clear the character would be masked, in case some actors opposed having their faces concealed.
Swallow previously did mask training in graduate school acting classes at New York University Tisch School of the Arts, but this marked the first time she had used the training on television, which she called an interesting challenge.
Favreau believed Swallow's mask training was evident in her performance.
In preparation for the role, Swallow re-watched the original Star Wars films, which she admired, saying: "I still get so completely swept up in them, in the heart of them, and so to be a part of that legacy is incredible."
She also watched shows like Star Wars: The Clone Wars, which she had not seen before, and she tried to conduct internet research about the history of the Mandalorians, but found it difficult because "as soon as you google anything related to Star Wars there are infinite rabbit holes you can go down", so she regularly questioned The Mandalorian executive producer Dave Filoni about the history of Star Wars and whether certain actions were consistent with the continuity.
Due to his past work in other Star Wars series, Swallow called him "an encyclopedia of Star Wars knowledge", and said it was a comfort to be able to draw upon his expertise.
Although Swallow herself is American, the voice she uses for the Armorer has elements of British and Mid-Atlantic accents.
This stemmed in part from her audition, when a casting associate asked her to try some takes with a British accent, since they had mostly been considering British actresses for the role before her.
Swallow had experience performing with a British accent from her theater work, as well as on the adult animated web television series Castlevania.
She also partially modeled the Armorer's voice after characters from the Lord of the Rings film series.
Swallow believes the Armorer's accent conveys authority and mystery, though she added: "Maybe it's because I'm American that I think that it's so interesting.
"
Swallow also brought a sublety to the part that she said was influenced to a certain extent by her previous work on the television series Supernatural, where she played a powerful primordial entity named Amara.
Swallow said while playing the part, she realized Amara seemed more powerful if her movements were minimal and deliberate, and she applied this same approach to the Armorer.
Swallow drew some inspiration for her performance as the Armorer from the personality of Deborah Chow, who directed the episode "Chapter 3: The Sin" and was the first woman to direct a live-action Star Wars story.
Swallow said she particularly drew from Chow's "intense curiosity", as well as the way she conveyed authority and commanded a room "in a very graceful and simple way".
Swallow felt the Armorer had this same effect by the way, particularly by the way she breaks up the fight in "Chapter 3: The Sin" without even raising her voice.
Swallow said she did not realize how much Chow influenced her performance and interpretation of the Armorer until later, when reporters asked her about the origins of the character.
Chow did not know this herself until informed by a reporter, after which she said it was a great compliment.
Chow has praised Swallow's performance and called the Armorer "such a great character".
===
Costume ===
The Armorer costume is predominantly red body armor, along with a gold helmet punctuated with tiny horn-like spikes.
The helmet has a T-shaped visor similar to those of all Mandalorians, as first featured on the popular Star Wars character Boba Fett.
However, Vanity Fair writer Anthony Breznican observed that her helmet is more ornate and elegant than those of other Mandalorian characters on the series, which he believed was meant to communicate an aura of leadership and regality.
It is stylized more like an ancient Spartan warrior than the others, particularly around the visor.
The costume also includes thick red gloves for welding and foundry work, as well as a fur shoulder piece, which Emily Swallow said she liked, but "it sure doesn’t seem very practical for somebody who is surrounded by fire all the time".
The costume tapers below the waist in a fashion similar to a skirt, though one with what Swallow calls a "strong, powerful quality that doesn't call too much attention" to itself.
The Armorer's costume took several weeks to make.
Swallow called it an "incredible process", and was impressed by the attention to detail.
Swallow first saw sketches of the costume a few weeks before filming began, and she said "my breath was taken away", adding: "I feel like it's one of the most amazing combinations of elegant and powerful that I've ever seen in a costume."
The costume was designed to give the character a sense of regality and communicate her position of leadership and authority over the other Mandalorians.
Pedro Pascal, the actor who plays the title character on The Mandalorian, jokingly said upon first seeing the Armorer's costume on set: "
Wait a minute, why does she get to look so much
cooler?"Swallow has said the experience of wearing the costume is "not nearly as dignified as it translates on film".
It was often difficult to move in it, and the helmet provided very little peripheral vision.
Even simply walking across the room was difficult because of the limited visibility, and because Swallow could not look down, she often feared she was going to trip, though her character's deliberately slow walking pace helped avoid doing so.
Swallow said: "I'm really glad that it looks as dignified and impressive as it does, because being inside of it feels ridiculous."
She and the other Mandalorian actors would occasionally bump into each other, hit their helmets against each other, or trip over each other.
Swallow said: "I really hope that at some point they release a bloopers reel, because when you put like two or more Mandalorians in a room together, chaos ensues."
===
Filming ===
All of the Armorer's scenes were filmed and completed more than a year before The Mandalorian was publicly announced, which Swallow described as "liberating" because she did not feel pressure stemming from publicity or the Star Wars fan community.
Before shooting began, Swallow spent time discussing the character with Jon Favreau and Dave Filoni.
She was not provided with a detailed backstory about the Armorer, but they described for her the inspirations behind the character, which she said was useful for her performance.
Swallow credited Favreau with creating a comfortable and collaborative filming environment, in which no one felt pressure despite the enormity of the Star Wars franchise, but rather excitement and a desire to make a quality product.
Swallow felt there was a "magical" feeling and "giddy playfulness" on the set unlike any other she had experienced before, and she said it reminded her of "being a kid and playing Princess Leia".
Favreau was present when most of the scenes with the Armorer were shot, and Swallow felt he did a good job of keeping everyone on the same consistent path, but also allowing each of the directors to bring their own unique style and abilities to their episodes.
Swallow said filming The Mandalorian was the most secretive process in which she had ever been involved, to the point she could not even tell her family or friends what she was making.
Swallow was initially provided only portions of the episode that involved her character, and only later was she allowed to read the scripts for the full episodes.
When she wanted to read the scripts, she had to access a web portal, which tracked when she logged on and for how long.
During the filming, the production staff was even more stringent with secrecy because photos from the set had recently leaked to the Internet, and paparazzi photographers were on the rooftops around the studio.
Whenever Swallow walked around the lot while wearing her costume, she had to conceal herself by wearing a black cloak with a hood, which she called her "cloak of invisibility".
Swallow knew little about the show outside of the scenes specifically involving her character, and she did not know certain cast members were even in the show until they were later announced in news releases.
A microphone was fitted inside the helmet so she could deliver dialogue while filming.
Unlike most roles Swallow has played, she was not required to wear make-up or have her hair styled to portray the Armorer because the character is masked, which is something the actress appreciated.
However, she wore the helmet and armor costume for up to nine hours at a time during filming.
The costume was not heavy, but the helmet was fitted with foam padding
so it fit closely to Swallow's head, and she occasionally asked to remove the helmet between takes because she felt claustrophobic.
Portraying emotion was a challenge because her face was completely obscured, so she could not use her eyes or facial expressions.
During filming she quickly learned that small movements could make a large impact due to the costume, which she believed was beneficial for her performance, but also presented challenges because minor gestures could become distracting or convey the wrong emotion.
During filming of the first episode in particular, Swallow said, the actors portraying Mandalorians had to "learn on the fly" how to master these movements and determine how they appeared on camera.
Several months of preparation work and rehearsal was done in advance of filming on the actual sets.
The Armorer's scenes for the "Chapter 1: The Mandalorian" and "Chapter 3:
The Sin" were shot concurrently with each other, with episode directors Filoni and Deborah Chow, respectively, alternating shoots on the set.
Swallow said Chow in particular gave her time to try different things and explore the character.
The Armorer's scenes were filmed on sound stages, with settings designed to resemble tunnels and sewers.
Swallow said she and the other actors portraying Mandalorians had to develop a type of "language" for their masks and armor costumes.
She occasionally dropped props like her tongs or hammer due to her thick gloves.
Scenes with her hammering metal or putting things into fire took a long time to prepare and film due to mobility challenges with the costume.
The fire was not real, but rather a digital effect added later.
Swallow and the filmmakers spent a considerable amount of time discussing how the Armorer would handle the beskar steel in "Chapter 3: The Sin", including such details as how she could look at it and stack it.
Since the material is an important part of Mandalorian culture and history, the character treats it with a type of reverence, but it is also tainted due to its previous association with the Empire, with the filmmakers comparing it to Nazi gold.
Swallow felt her character's handling of the steel purified it and returned it to its past noble standing.

The Armorer's fight scene against five stormtroopers at the end of "Chapter 8:
Redemption" was performed by stunt performer Lauren Mary Kim.
The Armorer's combat style in the scene was inspired by the Filipino martial art known as Kali.
It was the Armorer's only moment in the first season in which Swallow was not the one wearing the costume for the entirety of the scene.
Swallow told the show's fight coordinator that she would be willing to undertake martial arts training and perform a portion of the scene, but she was told the stunts would require years of training.
Swallow trained in Kali for a few weeks and did as much as possible, such as the transitions before and after the fight scene.
Swallow and Pedro Pascal knew each other prior to filming The Mandalorian.
They were familiar with each other through the New York theatre scene, and both appeared on the show
The Mentalist at the same time.
Swallow was a fan of Taika Waititi, who directed "Chapter 8: Redemption", and she expressed her admiration for him and his work but tried not to be too effusive because, she said, "the Armorer doesn't really fangirl, I think".
In the first-season finale, The Armorer appeared in scenes with the animatronic puppet used to portray "The Child", who became a viral sensation with fans and became affectionately known as "Baby Yoda".
Swallow said she "fell in love with it like everybody else", adding: "I was thrilled when they brought him in that little bag for the scene that I got to have with it.
I just wanted to snuggle it.
"
Swallow met Star Wars creator George Lucas during one of her filming days, after he visited the set as a surprise for Favreau's birthday.
Some time after her scenes were filmed, she did dubbing for parts of her dialogue in a recording studio in New York.

==
Cultural impact ==


===
Critical reception ===
The Armorer has been received positively by fans and reviewers alike, and has been described as a fan favorite.
Narayan Liu of Comic Book Resources called the Armorer the strongest character on The Mandalorian, and described her fight with stormtroopers at the end of the season finale as one of her greatest moments on the show so far.
Liu wrote: "There are a wide variety of bounty hunters and trained soldiers that appear throughout the series, but the Armorer is unmatched."
Brian Silliman of Syfy Wire called the Armorer "one of the more interesting characters featured thus far" in The Mandalorian and "a fantastic addition to the lore of the galaxy far, far away".
He complimented Emily Swallow's ability to portray emotion despite her face being concealed, and was particularly impressed by the way in which Swallow and Pedro Pascal forge an emotional connection in their scenes despite both wearing masks.
Charlie Ridgely of Comicbook.com "said fans became invested in the Armorer from her first appearance, and that she gained more depth as the series progressed.
He described her as "the most mysterious and intriguing" of the Mandalorian characters, as well as one of the "most dangerous characters in the show".
Judith Anne Dela Cruz of Epicstream called the Armorer an "intriguing" character, writing: "
There's definitely tons of cool characters in The Mandalorian, but a number of Star Wars fans have their eyes drawn to The Armorer.
"Armaan
Babu of MEA WorldWide wrote: "The Mandalorian introduces a wide array of new characters to the Star Wars universe, but perhaps none so commanding as The Armorer."
Matt Berger called the Armorer one of the biggest surprises from the series premiere of The Mandalorian, and that her crafting of the Mandalorian armor was one of the "most mesmerizing sequences" of the episode.
He also wrote that the Armorer had "one of the most unique looks to any Mandalorian that the Star Wars world has ever seen".
Q.V. Hough of Screen Rant said the Armorer played a "small but integral role", noting her importance in advancing the story and setting the Mandalorian on his path.
Nick Venable of CinemaBlend said he was intrigued by the interpersonal relationship between the Armorer and the Mandalorian.
Charles Ridgely of Comicbook.com praised Lauren
May Kim's stunt work as the Armorer, describing her fight scene with stormtroopers in "Chapter 8: Redemption" as "epic" and saying she "had fans jumping out of their seats".
Screen Rant writer Jessie Atkin expressed hope that the Armorer would return for the second season of The Mandalorian and that additional details about the character and her backstory would be provided.
The Armorer was ranked seventh on a Screen Rant list of the most interesting characters from the first season of The Mandalorian, eighth on a separate list of the ten best characters from the show, and third on a list of "10 Characters We Hope To See Return In Season 2".
Additionally, the Armorer's armor was ranked tenth on a Screen Rant list of the ten best costumes in the first season of The Mandalorian.
Swallow said most of the direct feedback she has received and seen about the Armorer have been positive.
She has attended Star Wars fan conventions since the release of the show and said she has been "greeted with so much joy and positivity", particularly from young girls who appreciated that the Armorer is a "badass warrior".
Swallow said she has been particularly impressed by fan art of the character that she had been sent on social media, including drawings of the Armorer and models constructed resembling her armor.
Swallow has shared some of this fan art on her own social media account, including a drawing of the Armorer fighting stormtroopers, and an image of the Armorer making a gesture similar to Rosie the Riveter in the
"We Can Do It!"
poster.
Although Swallow has appeared in franchises with large fanbases before, such as Supernatural, she said the level of fandom for Star Wars was bigger than anything she had ever done.
Swallow said it has been "liberating" to portray a character in a mask because there is no attention paid to her physical appearance in reviews and among fans, saying: "Nobody cares how I look.
They love the character so much, and it's really kind of freeing.
"
Unlike with Supernatural, Swallow does not get recognized in public for her connection with The Mandalorian, which she enjoys.
The line "This is the Way", first spoken by the Armorer and repeated by her several times throughout her appearances, became one of the most popular and oft-quoted lines of dialogue from The Mandalorian.
Silliman said even after just one week, the line was being spoken "everywhere".
Fans often request that Swallow write the catchphrase when she signs autographs.
Swallow said she first realized the line was a hit when she attended the premiere of The Mandalorian in Los Angeles on November 13.
During a screening of "Chapter 3: The Sin", when one of the Mandalorians says "This is the Way" during the final climactic battle, the entire audience repeated the line back to the screen, after which Swallow said, 'OK, I think we have something here.'"
She said of the phrase: "It's pretty fun to have something that seems to be lodged in people's psyche as a real phrase for all The Mandalorian people.
"
There has been a great deal of speculation among fans as to the identity of the Armorer.
Some have theorized she is Sabine Wren, a Mandalorian warrior and one of the main cast members of the animated television series Star Wars Rebels.
Others have argued the horns on her helmet are a reference to Darth Maul, a Star Wars antagonist who at one time ruled the Mandalorians.
Maul is a member of the species Zabrak, all of whom have an array of small horns atop their heads similar to those on the Armorer's helmet, leading to speculation she may be a Zabrak herself.

===
Merchandise ===
A Funko Pop figurine of the Armorer was announced on December 31, 2019.A Star Wars Black Series action figure was released during Hasbro's September 2020 PulseCon.
==
References ==


===
Citations ===


===
Works cited ===


==
External links ==
The Armorer on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Boba Fett () is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise created by George Lucas.
He is an armored Mandalorian bounty hunter featured in both the original and prequel film trilogies, but first appeared in Star Wars Holiday Special (1978), voiced by Don Francks.
In the original trilogy, the character is a supporting antagonist and was mainly portrayed by Jeremy Bulloch and voiced by Jason Wingreen.
Notable for his taciturn demeanor and for never removing his helmet, Fett appears in both The Empire Strikes Back (1980), employed by the Galactic Empire, and Return of the Jedi (1983), serving the crime lord Jabba the Hutt.
While seemingly killed in Return of the Jedi after falling into a sarlacc, he has since appeared in Star Wars media set after the film, confirming his survival.
Fett was retroactively added to the Special Edition of A New Hope released in 1997, making a non-speaking cameo appearance.
A preteen Boba is portrayed by Daniel Logan in the prequel film Attack of the Clones (2002), which reveals the character's origins as a clone of the bounty hunter Jango Fett, who raised him to be his son.

During development of The Empire Strikes Back, the character was originally conceived as a member of a group of white-armored Imperial "supercommandos" before the idea was scrapped in favor of a solitary bounty hunter; this concept later evolved into the Mandalorians, a cultural group with strong warrior traditions, who sport armor and helmets similar to Fett's.
For a long time, Boba's status as an actual Mandalorian has been questioned, until the bounty hunter himself revealed in The Mandalorian, that both he and his father, Jango Fett, are true Mandalorians, even aiding fellow Mandalorian Din Djarin in the rescue of Grogu, a Mandalorian foundling.
The character's armor incorporates various gadgets, including a jetpack, flamethrower, whipcord launcher, wrist laser, and vibroblades.
This, combined with his skills in both armed and unarmed combat, have led to the character's nearly flawless streak of successful contracts, and reputation as the best bounty hunter in the galaxy of his era.
Fett is also a skilled pilot and owns a spaceship called the Slave I, previously used by his father, much like the armor.

Aside from the films, the character appears in various canonical and non-canonical Star Wars media, such as books, comics, television series, and video games, many of which depict him as an antihero rather than a villain, and explore his background, motivations, and morality.
For the 2008 animated series, Star Wars:
The Clone Wars, Daniel Logan reprised his role as Fett, while Temuera Morrison, who voiced the character in other Star Wars projects and played Jango in Attack of The Clones, physically portrayed Fett in the original Disney+ series The Mandalorian, and is set to reprise the role in the spin-off The Book of Boba Fett.

The character of Boba Fett quickly became a fan favorite despite his limited presence in the original trilogy, and is a widely recognized figure in popular culture.
His popularity within the Star Wars fanbase has earned him a cult following.

== Appearances ==
The character of Boba Fett made his first public appearance at the San Anselmo Country Fair parade on 24 September 1978.
In the parade, the Boba Fett costume was worn by Duwayne Dunham, working at the time as an assistant film editor and who later became a film and television director.
The character debuted on television two months later in an animated segment produced by Toronto-based animation firm Nelvana Productions for the Star Wars Holiday Special.
Fett appears as a mysterious figure who saves Luke Skywalker, Chewbacca, C-3PO, and R2-D2 from a giant monster, only to be revealed as a bounty hunter working for Darth Vader.
After his image and identity were revealed in the Holiday Special, costumed Fett characters appeared in shopping malls and special events, putting up wanted posters of the character to distinguish him from the franchise's Imperial characters.

===
Skywalker saga ===


====
Original trilogy era ====
Fett's theatrical film debut was an unnamed bounty hunter in The Empire Strikes Back as the "next major villain" besides Darth Vader.
He is one of six bounty hunters assembled by Vader, who promises a reward to whomever captures the crew of the Millennium Falcon.
Fett tracks the starship to Cloud City, where Vader captures its passengers and tortures its captain, Han Solo.
Aiming to collect the bounty Jabba the Hutt has placed on Solo (established in the original film), Fett questions Vader regarding the carbon freeze, which Vader intends to use on his true target, Luke Skywalker.
Vader promises that the Empire will compensate Fett if Solo dies, but the smuggler survives and Vader turns him over to Fett.

Return of the Jedi features Boba Fett at Jabba the Hutt's palace on Tatooine, where Han Solo's rescuers are captured.
He aims his weapon at Princess Leia (disguised as bounty hunter Boushh)
when she threatens Jabba with a thermal detonator, and he later travels on Jabba's sail barge to the Great Pit of Carkoon (home of a sessile carnivorous creature known as a sarlacc) where the prisoners are to be executed.
When the prisoners revolt and fight back, Fett flies over and intervenes by tying up Luke, who manages to escape.
Chewbacca warns Han Solo, who is still blind after being frozen in carbonite, that Boba Fett is near.
As Solo turns around, he inadvertently sets off Fett's rocket pack, sending the bounty hunter falling into the sarlacc's mouth and his apparent death.
In the 1997 Special Edition release of the film, Fett is featured flirting with some of Jabba's female dancers in a newly filmed scene.
Fett appears in an episode of the 1985 Droids animated series set before the original trilogy and produced by the same studio as the animated segment of the Holiday Special.
In "A Race to the Finish", Fett is hired by the Fromms to help them get revenge on the masters of the droids R2-D2 and C-3PO.
He later turns on them after failing their request, and decides to accept Jabba's bounty on the Fromms as compensation.
In the 1997 Special Edition of A New Hope, Fett briefly appears in a reintroduced cut scene outside the Millennium Falcon while Jabba confronts Han Solo, although he is digitally superimposed onto the image, as he was not in the original version of the scene.

====
Prequel trilogy era ====
The 2002 prequel film Star Wars:
Episode II –
Attack of the Clones reveals that Boba Fett is an unaltered clone of the bounty hunter Jango Fett (Temuera Morrison), who had him created on Kamino to be raised as his son as part of his price to serve as the template for the Grand Army of the Republic's clone troopers.
Boba helps Jango escape from Obi-Wan Kenobi.
Later, on Geonosis he witnesses Jango's death at the hands of Jedi Master Mace Windu.

===
Television ===


====
The Clone Wars ====
Logan reprised his role as the voice of Fett in the CGI-animated series The Clone Wars.
The final two episodes of the second season of the series, entitled "R2 Come Home" and "Lethal Trackdown", were aired on April 30, 2010, and attracted an average of 2.756 million viewers during the original broadcast.
The finale is significant for ending "with twin fandom bangs, courtesy of Boba Fett and a mammoth beast inspired by Godzilla".
Fett's entrance in the series commemorates the 30-year anniversary of the character's appearance in The Empire Strikes Back.
In the story arc, Boba infiltrates Mace Windu's flagship in the guise of a clone trooper cadet, hoping to exact revenge against the Jedi for killing his father.
After a failed attempt to bomb Windu in his quarters, he sabotages the ship's engines, causing it to crash on a nearby planet.
He and his bounty hunter accomplices then take hostages from the ship's crew, whom they try to use to bait the Jedi Master.
Throughout the ordeal, Fett balks at committing violence against his fellow clones, which comes to a head when his mentor Aurra Sing executes Windu's clone trooper second-in-command.
Plo Koon and Ahsoka Tano eventually track Fett and his compatriots to pirate Hondo Ohnaka's base.
Fett is ultimately captured by the Jedi and sentenced to prison on Coruscant; although he expresses regret for the collateral damage he has caused, he vows to never forgive Windu.

Fett escapes prison in the fourth-season episode "Deception".
He later forms his own bounty hunter syndicate, Krayt's Claw, which includes Bossk and Dengar (both of whom first appeared in The Empire Strikes Back alongside Fett).
In the episode "Bounty", Krayt's Claw is hired to deliver a package to a dictator.
When the bounty hunters discover that their cargo is in fact a young woman destined for a forced marriage to the despot, Fett is indifferent to her plight and insists the team proceed with their mission.
Temporary member Asajj Ventress, enraged, turns on Fett; she strangles him with the Force, binds and gags him, and shoves him into the container in the captive's place, whereupon he is delivered to the nonplussed client.

====
The Mandalorian ====
Boba Fett's presence in the original Disney+ series
The Mandalorian was first hinted at in the first-season episode "Chapter 5:
The Gunslinger", which ends with a mysterious figure wearing boots and what appears to be a cape approaching the body of Fennec Shand on Tatooine.

In May 2020, it was reported that Temuera Morrison would appear as Fett in the second season of The Mandalorian.
As the series takes place five years following Return of the Jedi, this would confirm the character's survival after his fall into the sarlacc's mouth and retcon his apparent death.
In the second season's premiere, "Chapter 9:
The Marshal"
, it is explained that Fett's armor was salvaged by Jawas after his supposed death, and then bought by Cobb Vanth, a character first introduced in the Star Wars:
Aftermath trilogy of novels, who used it to protect the Tatooinian village of Mos Pelgo from various threats.
In the episode, the armor is eventually obtained by the Mandalorian, after Vanth relinquishes it so that it could be returned to its rightful owners: the Mandalorian people.
As he leaves with the armor, the Mandalorian is watched from the distance by a heavily scarred Fett.
Fett's first full appearance in the series occurred in the episode "Chapter 14:
The Tragedy", in which it is explained that he saved Fennec's life after she was mortally wounded, leaving her in his debt, and that he is looking to retrieve his armor from the Mandalorian.
Fett and Fennec follow him in Slave I to the planet Tython, where the former explains that he armor belonged to his late father Jango, a Mandalorian foundling, and is, thus, Fett's birthright.
In exchange for the armor's return, Fett and Fennec ensure the safety of Grogu, an alien infant the Mandalorian has adopted.
When Moff Gideon's Imperial forces attack the group, Fett dons his old armor and helps to fend off the stormtroopers deployed to capture Grogu, but the group ultimately fail to prevent him from being taken by Gideon's Dark Troopers.
After revealing to Djarin his status as a true Mandalorian, Fett insists that he and Fennec shall remain indebted to the Mandalorian until the child is safe, and aid his efforts to rescue Grogu in both  "Chapter 15:
The Believer" and ''
Chapter 16:
The Rescue'', which show Fett as having cleaned and repainted his armor.
In the latter episode, Fett is initially at odds with Bo-Katan Kryze, the former ruler of Mandalore and one of the allies that the Mandalorian tries to recruit to help save Grogu, because she calls him a disgrace to his Mandalorian armor due to his origins as a clone.
Despite this, the two reluctantly work together to rescue the child from Moff Gideon, with Fett creating a distraction that allows the rest of the crew to board Gideon's ship.
After this, Fett flies into hyperspace and is not seen again until a post-credits scene, in which he and Fennec return to Tatooine and kill Bib Fortuna, who has been in charge of Jabba's palace since his death.
Fett then sits on the throne that once belonged to Jabba, with Fennec at his side, setting the stage for The Book of Boba Fett.
====
The Book of Boba Fett ====
The Book of Boba Fett is a spin-off of The Mandalorian focused on Boba Fett, which is scheduled for a December 2021 release.
Morrison and Ming-Na Wen will reprise their roles as Fett and Fennec Shand, respectively.

===
Other media ===
In the first issue of Marvel Comics' Darth Vader (2015), the title character hires Boba Fett to capture the pilot who destroyed the Death Star.
In the concurrent Star Wars comic (2015), Fett tracks the pilot, Luke Skywalker, to Tatooine, although the latter escapes after a brief fight.
Fett then tells Vader the pilot's surname, unknowingly informing the Sith lord (formerly Anakin Skywalker) that he has a son.
Fett also features in Marvel's Bounty Hunters (2020), which is set between The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi.
The upcoming comic miniseries War of the Bounty Hunters (2021) will be set in the same era, and be preceded by standalone comics including tie-ins with Star Wars, Bounty Hunters, Darth Vader, and Doctor Aphra.
Fett appears as a playable character in video games Star Wars Battlefront (2015) and Star Wars Battlefront II (2017), as well as a number of Star Wars games for mobile devices.

===
Legends ===
The character appears extensively in the Star Wars Expanded Universe of novels, comic books, and video games, dating to as early as the newspaper comic strip and Marvel's Star Wars series (produced concurrently to the original film trilogy).
In April 2014, such works were rebranded by Lucasfilm as Star Wars Legends and declared non-canon to the rest of the franchise in order to create a blank slate for the sequel trilogy.

Boba Fett appears in many other works set during the original trilogy, including the choose-your-own-adventure book The Bounty Hunter (1994), the 1996 Shadows of the Empire multimedia project, Dark Horse's short comic Boba Fett: Salvage (1997), volumes of the young-reader series Galaxy of Fear (1997–1998), The Bounty Hunter Wars book trilogy (1998–1999), issues of Empire (2002–2005) and Star Wars (2013–14), and the one-shot comic Boba Fett: Overkill (2006).
Fett appears in the years leading up to A New Hope in the comic Boba Fett: Enemy of the Empire (1999), in which Vader hires Fett before trying to kill him, as well as Agent of the Empire (2012–2013), Blood Ties (2010–2012), and Underworld:
The Yavin Vassilika (2000–2001).

A 1983 issue of the original Marvel Star Wars comic book set just after Return of the Jedi depicts Fett temporarily escaping the sarlacc pit.
Works such as Dark Horse's Dark Empire series (1991–1992) further utilized Fett's survival.
A 1995 anthology story by Daniel Keys Moran narrates some of his time in the sarlacc, and a 1996 story by Dave Wolverton narrates how Dengar finds him and restores him back to health.
In the comic Boba Fett: Twin Engines of Destruction (1997), while Fett recovers after being freed from the sarlaac, he is impersonated by a bounty hunter named Jodo Kast, whom Fett then hunts.
Four Boba Fett comics set several years after Return of the Jedi were released between 1995 and 2000.
Fett encounters Han Solo in the short story
The Last One Standing: The Tale of Boba Fett (1996), set 15 years after the events of the same film, and fights side by side with him in The New Jedi Order:
The Unifying Force (2003), set a decade later.
He also appears in the e-novella Boba Fett: A Practical Man, set 20 years after Jedi.
In the Legacy of the Force series (2006–2008), set some 35 years after Jedi, Han and Leia's daughter, Jaina, asks Fett to train her to help her defeat her corrupted brother, Jacen.
In The Last One Standing, Daniel Keys Moran developed a backstory for Fett in which he was once named Jaster Mereel, a "Journeyman Protector" lawman who was convicted of treason.
His backstory was depicted differently in Attack of the Clones, leading to the Dark Horse comic Jango Fett: Open Seasons (2003) retconning Mereel to Jango's mentor.
A young-adult book series called Boba Fett (2002–2004) depicts Fett's roots as a bounty hunter during the Clone Wars, when he takes his father's ship and begins working for Jabba the Hutt.

====
The Bounty Hunter Wars ====
The Bounty Hunter Wars is a trilogy of novels by K.W. Jeter set during the events of the original trilogy.
The books were published by Bantam Spectra in July 1998, November 1998, and July 1999, respectively.
The trilogy depicts Fett as being more communicative than in the films because its plot requires Fett to show "an ability to convince people as well as kill them".
The first book, The Mandalorian Armor, starts during the events of Return of the Jedi, shortly after Jabba's sail barge is destroyed.
Dengar stays with Fett after the latter's near-death experience, and encounters Neelah, a dancer in Jabba's palace who has lost her memory, and thinks Fett can help her.
Kuat of Kuat, an Imperial executive, reviews footage from the Great Pit of Carkoon, leading him to suspect that Fett is still alive.
It is related in flashbacks set between A New Hope and
The Empire Strikes Back that Fett stole a bounty Bossk and Zuckuss
were hunting on behalf of the Bounty Hunters Guild.
After delivering the bounty, Fett accepted a contract to join the Bounty Hunters Guild in order to break it up.
The Emperor met with Darth Vader and Prince Xizor, where the latter revealed that it was he who planned for Fett to join the guild in order to eliminate its weakest members, leaving only the best for the Empire to exploit.

In the second book, Slave Ship, Fett abandons the Slave I to avoid dispelling rumors of his death, and instead steals Bossk's ship.
Riding along, Dengar tells Neelah about the split of the Bounty Hunters Guild.
After Bossk killed his father, the guild split into two factions: one composed of the older members, and another composed of Bossk and other younger members.
Prince Xizor placed an enormous bounty on a renegade stormtrooper who slaughtered his entire ship's crew.
Fett, Bossk and Zuckuss captured the trooper, but Fett jettisoned his partners in an escape pod.

In the third and final book, Hard Merchandise, it is related that Fett tried to claim his bounty, but found Xizor waiting to kill him in order to tie up loose ends related to his plot.
In an attack on the megalomaniacal prince, Kuat of Kuat had falsified some evidence implicating him in the murder of Luke Skywalker's aunt and uncle.
This information was on the renegade stormtrooper's ship (which is why Kuat wanted to make sure the bounty hunter was dead) but is retrieved by Fett in the present, as Neelah realizes she is from an elite Kuat family and stops her sinister sister from taking over the now-suicidal Imperial executive's shipyard.

====
Boba Fett: A Practical Man ====
Boba Fett:
A Practical Man is an e-novella by Karen Traviss, which was published online in August 2006 by Del Rey Books.
Set 20 years after the events of Return of the Jedi, it focuses on what led Boba Fett and the Mandalorians to fend off the extragalactic Yuuzhan Vong invaders in The New Jedi Order:
The Unifying Force (set a few months later).

A Yuuzhan Vong named Nom Anor meets Fett on Mandalore and begins giving him and the Mandalorians directions to help their invasion.
Fett plans to do as much damage to the invaders as possible, even as he pretends to help them.
He instructs a pilot to deliver his plea for help to the New Republic, but with the Vong's next target still unwarned, the world falls without a fight.

A Vong warrior asks Fett to assist in killing a Jedi; instead, Fett convinces the Jedi to deliver his message.

The Jedi returns and confirms that Fett has a deal
: the Mandalorians will continue to masquerade as Vong mercenaries while passing intel to the Republic.
Fett agrees to have a few of his best commandos train planetary militias to fight the Vong.

===
Unproduced works ===
A planned live-action TV series developed by Star Wars creator George Lucas before the sale of Lucasfilm to Disney, under the working title Star Wars: Underworld, would have featured Fett.
====
Star Wars 1313 ====
The cancelled LucasArts video game Star Wars 1313, announced at E3 2012, would have told the story of Boba Fett's career as a young adult bounty hunter between the prequel and original trilogies.
Fett would have navigated past the scum of civilization in an underground area of Coruscant known as Level 1313.
In 2013, as a result of Disney's acquisition of the franchise, all LucasArts projects then in production were shelved.
In a December 2015 interview with /Film, Lucasfilm president Kathleen Kennedy stated that the concept art for the game was "unbelievable" and that, along with Star Wars: Underworld, it was "something we're spending a lot of time looking at, poring through, discussing, and we may very well develop those things
further".
Level 1313 appears in Star Wars media such as The Clone Wars, in which it is visited by Ahsoka Tano, and Star Wars Adventures:
Return to Vader's Castle.

====
The Clone Wars episodes ====
Fett was to have appeared in more episodes of The Clone Wars before its cancellation.
A series of Western-inspired episodes would have featured Fett teaming up with Cad Bane to rescue a child kidnapped by Tusken Raiders on Tatooine; Aurra Sing would have appeared as well.
The story arc would have depicted Fett donning his Mandalorian armor for the first time, and ended with Bane blasting Fett in the head, creating the iconic dent in his helmet (an idea which came from George Lucas).
Animatic footage of the climactic scene was shown at Star Wars Celebration.

====
Standalone film ====
In early 2013, Disney CEO Bob Iger announced the development of a Star Wars spin-off film written by Simon Kinberg, which Entertainment Weekly reported would focus on Boba Fett during the original trilogy.
In mid-2014, Josh Trank was officially announced as the director of an undisclosed spin-off film, but had left the project a year later due to creative differences with Kinberg, causing a teaser for the Fett film to be scrapped from Star Wars Celebration.
In May 2018, it was reported that James Mangold had signed on to write and direct a Fett film, with Kinberg attached as producer and co-writer.
The author of a Fett-focused Legends story stated that Lucasfilm had considered adapting it into a film.
By October, the Fett film was reportedly dead, with the studio instead focusing on the Mandalorian series on Disney+; the Mandalorian character Din Djarin features a similar design to Fett.
The Fett film was afterwards reported to have also featured the other bounty hunters from The Empire Strikes Back.

==
Concept and development ==
George Lucas created Boba Fett in his April 1978 draft of The Empire Strikes Back, basing the character on Sergio Leone's Man with No Name (Clint Eastwood).
The character needed to be designed quickly, as Lucas had agreed for him to be featured in the Star Wars Holiday Special later that year.
The character's design stemmed from initial concepts for Darth Vader, who was originally conceived as a rogue bounty hunter.
While Vader became less a mercenary and more of a dark knight, the bounty hunter concept remained, and Fett became "an equally villainous" but "less conspicuous" character.
Concept artist Ralph McQuarrie influenced Fett's design, which was finalized by and is credited to Joe Johnston.
Norman Reynolds and the film's art department built the costume.
Fett's armor was originally designed for "super troopers", and was adapted for Fett as the script developed.
Screen-tested in all-white, Fett's armor eventually garnered a subdued color scheme intended to visually place him between white-armored "rank-and-file" Imperial stormtroopers and Vader, who wears black.
This color scheme had the added bonus of conveying the "gray morality" of his character.
The character's armor was designed to appear to have been scavenged from multiple sources, and it is adorned with trophies.
A description of Fett's armor in the mid-1979 Bantha Tracks newsletter catalyzed "rampant speculation" about his origins.
By 1979, Fett's backstory included having served in an army of Imperial shock troops which had battled the clone troopers of the Republic during the Clone Wars.
Despite two years of widespread publicity about Fett's appearance in The Empire Strikes Back, script rewrites significantly reduced the character's presence in the film.
Fett's musical theme, composed by John Williams, is "not music, exactly" but "more of a gurgly, viola-and-bassoon thing aurally cross-pollinated with some obscure static sounds."
Sound editor Ben Burtt added the sound of jangling spurs, created and performed by the foley artist team of Robert Rutledge and Edward Steidele, to Fett's appearance in Cloud City, intending to make the character menacing and the scene reminiscent of similar gunfighter appearances in Western films.
At one point in Return of the Jedi's development, Fett was conceived as being a main villain, but he was finally replaced with Emperor Palpatine when Lucas decided to not make a third trilogy of Star Wars.
Lucas also considered Fett fighting Lando during the sarlacc sequence.
An official reference book states that Fett charges "famously expensive" fees and that he undertakes only when the mission meets "his harsh sense of justice".

Daniel Keys Moran, who wrote a few stories featuring Boba Fett, cited Westerns as an influence on his development of the character.
Moran said:

The difficult thing with Fett was finding a worldview for him that permitted him to proclaim a Code — given the stark Evil that permeated the Empire, Fett pretty much had to be either 1)
Evil, or 2) an incredibly unforgiving, harsh, "greater good" sort of guy.
The second approach worked and has resonated with some readers.

Lucas at one point considered depicting Vader and Fett as brothers in the prequel films, but discounted it as too "hokey".
In continuing to develop the character in the prequel films, Lucas closed some avenues for expanding the character's story while opening others.
Lucas considered adding a shot of Fett escaping the sarlacc in later editions of Return of the Jedi, but decided against it because it would have detracted from the story's focus.
Lucas also said that, had he known Fett would be so popular, he would have made the character's death "more exciting".
In 2014, Star Wars historian Jonathan W. Rinzler revealed that Lucas had told him that Fett escaped from the sarlacc, although this was not confirmed until Fett's appearance in The Mandalorian six years later.

===
Film casting and production ===
Boba Fett is primarily played by Jeremy Bulloch in The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi.
Bulloch's half-brother alerted him to the role.
He was cast as Fett because the costume happened to fit "as if a Savile Row tailor had come out and made it"; he did not have to do a reading or screen test, and Bulloch never worked from a script for either film.
Filming the role for Empire lasted three weeks.
The actor was pleased with the costume and used it to convey the character's menace.
Bulloch based his performance on Clint Eastwood's portrayal of the Man with No Name in A Fistful of Dollars; similar to the Western character, Bulloch cradled the blaster prop, made the character seem ready to shoot, slightly tilted his head, and stood a particular way.
Bulloch did not try to construct a backstory for the character, and said later that "the less you do with Boba Fett, the stronger he becomes".
Playing Fett in Empire was both the smallest and most physically uncomfortable role Bulloch has played; Bulloch said donning the heavy jetpack was the worst aspect of the role.
Bulloch spent four weeks on Return of the Jedi.
He was unaware of Fett's demise before filming began and was "very upset" by the development; he would like to have done more with Fett.
Still, Bulloch believed killing Fett made the character stronger, and that his "weak" death makes fans want the character to return.
Bulloch thought a scene created for the Special Edition in which Fett flirts with one of Jabba's dancers was not in keeping with the character's nature.
A younger version of the character was played by Daniel Logan in Attack of the Clones.
Logan had not seen any of the Star Wars films prior to being cast as Fett, but he watched the original trilogy at Lucas' request.
The actor had to rely on his imagination for the bluescreen filming.
Both Bulloch and Logan had also expressed interest in reprising their role of Fett in the planned Underworld TV series, but the series remains undeveloped.

====
Other portrayals ====
According to the official Star Wars website, Fett was voiced by Don Francks in the Holiday Special.
Bulloch wore Fett's costume in Empire and Jedi, but John Morton filled in during one scene for Empire, and Jason Wingreen voiced the character in Empire.
His brief appearance in A New Hope was performed by Industrial Light & Magic creature animator Mark Austin.
The character's appearance in the Special Edition footage of Jedi was performed by Don Bies and Nelson Hall.
For the 2004 rereleases, Temuera Morrison replaced the character's original voice for continuity with Attack of the Clones establishing that Boba is a clone of his father, Jango, also portrayed by Morrison.
The character's voice in National Public Radio's Star Wars radio dramas was provided by Alan Rosenberg in The Empire Strikes Back
and Ed Begley, Jr. in Return of the Jedi, Tim Glovatsky in the audio adaptation of Dark Forces:
Rebel Agent, Joe Hacker in an audio adaptation of the Dark Empire comics, Temuera Morrison for Empire at War, Battlefront II and Battlefront:
Elite Squadron, Dee Bradley Baker in The Force Unleashed,
The Force Unleashed II and Star Tours:
The Adventures Continue, Chris Cox in Rogue Squadron III: Rebel Strike, Tom Kane in Galactic Battlegrounds, Demolition and Jedi Knight: Jedi Academy, and Daniel Logan for The Clone Wars animated TV series and Lego Star Wars: The Video Game.
The first live-action depiction of Fett outside the theatrical films was in the second season of the original Disney+ series The Mandalorian, wherein Morrison reprised the role.
The character also made a cameo appearance in a live-action mockumentary filmed on the set of Return of the Jedi titled Return of the Ewok (1982).
Post-production was never completed, and it has never been officially released.

== Reception ==
Boba Fett is a "cult figure" and one of the most popular Star Wars characters.
In 2008, Boba Fett was selected by Empire magazine as the 79th greatest movie character of all time, and he is included on Fandomania's list of The 100 Greatest Fictional Characters.
IGN ranked Boba Fett as the eighth top Star Wars character, due to his status as a fan-favourite and cult following.
He personifies "danger and mystery", and Susan Mayse calls Fett "the unknowable Star Wars character" who "delivers mythic presence."
Although Tom Bissell asserts that no one knows why Boba Fett has become so popular, nor cares why, both Lucas and Bulloch cite Fett's mysterious nature as reasons for his popularity.
Bulloch, who has never fully understood the character's popularity, attributes it to the costume and the respect Fett garners from Darth Vader and Jabba the Hutt.
The initial Boba Fett toy, more than Fett's actual film appearance, might be responsible for the character's popularity; Henry Jenkins suggests children's play helped the character "take on a life of its own".
Moran said Vader's admonition specifically to Fett in The Empire Strikes Back—"No disintegrations"—gives Fett credibility; he was interested in Fett because the character is "strong, silent, [and] brutal".
Jeter says that even when Fett appears passive, he conveys "capability and ruthlessness".
Bissell credits Bulloch for giving Fett "effortless authority" in his first scene in The Empire Strikes Back, using such nuances as cradling his blaster and slightly cocking his head.
Fett's small role in the film may actually have made the character seem more intriguing.
Logan, who was a Young Artist Award nominee for his portrayal of Fett, compares Fett to "that boy in school who never talks" and who attracts others' curiosity.
Bissell adds that Boba Fett, along with other minor characters like Darth Maul and Kyle Katarn, appeals to adolescent boys' "images of themselves: essentially bad-ass but ... honorable about it."
This tension and the absence of a clear "evil nature" (distinct from evil actions) offer Fett dramatic appeal.
Furthermore, Fett "is cool because he was designed to be cool", presenting a "wicked ambiguity" akin to John Milton's portrayal of Satan in Paradise Lost and Iago in William Shakespeare's Othello.
Bissell compares Fett to Beowulf, Ahab, and Huckleberry Finn: characters "too big" for their original presentation, and apt for continued development in other stories.
Moran finds Fett reminiscent of the Man with No Name.
Fett has been featured extensively in pop culture and parodies.
Breckin Meyer provides his voice in various Robot Chicken sketches.
Nerdcore rapper MC Chris included a Star Wars-themed song titled "Fett's Vette" on his 2001 debut album.
The creator of the Spartan helmets for the 2006 film 300 painted one of them to look like Fett's helmet.

The San Francisco Chronicle describes Boba Fett fans as "among the most passionate", and the character is important to Star Wars fan culture.
Boba Fett's popular following before the character even appeared in The Empire Strikes Back influenced Damon Lindelof's interest in developing Lost across multiple media.
Between filming The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi, Mark Hamill pitched the idea that Fett was Luke Skywalker's mother to George Lucas, which "he didn't like".
In about 2000, a feminist campaigned online to have the character unmasked as a woman.
Fan parodies include Boba Phat, a cosplay "intergalactic booty hunter" created by David James.

===
In The Clone Wars ===
IGN reviewer Eric Goldman rated the first episode 8.2/10 and the second 8.8/10, stating "this was a very layered, exciting episode to end Season 2 on", though he did not appreciate Boba Fett's limited dialogue.
Bryan Young, a writer for The Huffington Post and Examiner.com, also disliked Fett's responses at the end of the episode when confronting Mace Windu: "He says something incredibly whiny.
"
Young does state, however, that "[o]verall, this pair of episodes was a satisfying conclusion to season two, which really upped the game in this series in terms of animation, storytelling and suspense."
GalacticBinder.com's reviewer Chris Smith wrote, "Lucasfilm delivers another exciting episode to finish off a tremendous second season."
Adam Rosenberg writing in MTV Movies Blog discusses Boba Fett's return: "He's going to have to be put through a lot more
hell before he embraces his inner badass.
I'll say though...
he's off to a mighty good start with the dual blasters he wears on his belt.
Sure, they're almost the size of his thighs, but hey... he's still just a kid."

===
In The Mandalorian ===
Temuera Morrison received positive reviews from critics for his portrayal of Boba Fett in season 2 of The Mandalorian.

===
Merchandising ===
Fett is one of the top five best-selling Star Wars action figures, and Boba Fett-related products are "among the most expensive" Star Wars merchandise.
Fett was the first new mail-away action figure created for The Empire Strikes Back; although advertised as having a rocket-firing backpack, safety concerns led Kenner to sell his rocket attached.
Gray called the early toy "a rare and precious commodity", and one of the rocket-firing prototypes sold at auction for $16,000 in 2003.
In 2018 and 2019, two of the prototypes were sold at auction, for £69,000 ($USD92,000) and £90,000 ($USD120,000), respectively—each setting the world record for the highest auction price of a Star Wars toy at that time.
A fully painted figure with a rare variant on the firing mechanism is planned to be auctioned and estimated to be worth $200,000.In August 2009, Hasbro released a Fett action figure based on McQuarrie's white-armored concept, and Boba Fett as both a child and bounty hunter have been made into Lego minifigures and a helmet statue of boba fett in his armor.
Wizards of the Coast's Star Wars Trading Card Game includes several Boba Fett cards.
Hallmark Cards created a Boba Fett Christmas tree ornament.

In January 2015, an unopened Boba Fett figure sold for £18,000 at auction in the UK, the figure was in factory fresh condition and did not have the packaging punched for hanging in a shop.

==
Discrepancies ==
For a long time, Fett's status as an actual Mandalorian has been questioned, as was his father's, Jango Fett.
In the Star Wars Legends continuity, it was known that both were true Mandalorian warriors, while in the current Star Wars Canon, it remained ambiguous, as there were sources that described them both simultaneously as Mandalorians and non-Mandalorians.
This discrepancy was solved in Chapter 14:
The Tragedy, the sixth episode of the second season of the "The Mandalorian" TV series, where it was revealed that both Boba and Jango are also true Mandalorians in Canon.

== See also ==
Space western


==
References ==
Footnotes
Citations


==
External links ==
Boba Fett in the StarWars.com Databank
Meet Boba Fett – screen-test footage of the prototype Boba Fett costume
Boba Fett on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Boba Fett on IMDb
Boba Fett fan club
Jango Fett is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise, created by George Lucas.
He first appeared as an antagonist in the 2002 film Star Wars:
Episode II – Attack of the Clones, played by Temuera Morrison.
The character is a Mandalorian bounty hunter, regarded as the best mercenary in the galaxy of his era, and the 'father' of Boba Fett, a clone of Jango whom he kept as payment for serving as the genetic template of the Galactic Republic's clone army, and raised as if he were his biological son.
After Jango's death at the hands of Mace Windu, Boba follows in his father's footsteps, using his armor, equipment, and ship, Slave I, to become a successful bounty hunter in his own right.

Outside of the films, the character appears in a number of canonical and non-canonical Star Wars works, such as comic books and video games, which depict him as an antihero rather than a villainous figure, and explore his past as both a bounty hunter and Mandalorian warrior.
Since the release of Attack of the Clones, Jango Fett has become a popular figure within the Star Wars fanbase, gaining a cult following.

==
Characteristics ==


===
Concept and creation ===
In early drafts of Attack of the Clones, Fett's first name was "J'mee".
His name is a reference to Sergio Corbucci's 1966 Spaghetti Western film Django, featuring a hyper-violent drifter of the same name played by Franco Nero.
Django was very well-known due to the uses and abuses that the Spaghetti Western industry made of his name and character during the 1970s and 1980s.

Jango is covered in a sleek armored suit that conceals his scarred face, largely based on Boba Fett's iconic outfit (designed by Joe Johnston) from the original trilogy.
His suit was initially planned to be white to match the concept art for Boba Fett, but this was changed to silver and blue, in contrast to Boba's green, red, and orange.
Jango also uniquely has thigh, shin, and spat armor, as well as a comparative lack of accessories and trophies.
Franchise creator George Lucas decided that Jango would wear Mandalorian armor but would not be from their planet.

===
Portrayal ===
Jango Fett was portrayed by Temuera Morrison in Attack of the Clones, who subsequently voiced the character in most of his video game appearances, including Star Wars: Bounty Hunter, Star Wars: Battlefront II, Star Wars:
Republic Commando, Star Wars Battlefront:
Elite Squadron, and the PSP version of Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed.
According to Morrison, he "couldn't see anything" while wearing the costume's helmet due to fog from his breath, making it difficult to perform.
Additionally, Jango was portrayed by Bob Marshall in a commercial for Star Wars:
Bounty Hunter (but the voice was provided by a different, unknown actor), and voiced by Jeff Bennett in the games
Star Wars:
Galactic Battlegrounds and Star Wars: Jedi Starfighter, and Andrew Chaikin in Star Wars Battlefront: Renegade Squadron.
==
Appearances ==


===
Film and television ===


====
Attack of the Clones ====
In Star Wars: Episode II – Attack of the Clones, Jango is depicted as a bounty hunter who had been hired to be the genetic template for the Grand Army of the Republic, becoming entangled in a shady plot by Darth Tyranus.
He is later hired by Viceroy Nute Gunray of the Trade Federation to assassinate Senator Padmé Amidala in retaliation for her actions in The Phantom Menace.
Fett subcontracts the job to shape-shifter Zam Wesell.
Two failed assassination attempts on the Senator's life force Fett to kill Wesell with a poison dart, to prevent her from potentially leading the Jedi to the ocean planet Kamino.
Despite Jango's efforts, Obi-Wan Kenobi's own investigation of the poison dart ultimately brings him to Kamino, where he soon learns that a cloning facility on the planet is using Jango's genetic template to produce a massive clone army, seemingly commissioned on behalf of the Galactic Republic.
The ensuing confrontation between Obi-Wan and Jango forces the latter to flee to Geonosis, rendezvousing with his benefactor Tyranus.
Jango takes part in the Battle of Geonosis, where he encounters a rhinoceros-like beast known as a reek, which tramples and damages his jetpack.
Unable to fly away, he is then decapitated by Jedi Master Mace Windu.
Jango's legacy is taken up in the form of the Republic's clone army based on his genetic material, as well as his son Boba, who inherits the armor once worn by Jango and goes on to become the most notorious bounty hunter in the galaxy.

====
The Clone Wars ====
Jango is mentioned posthumously several times in the CGI animated series Star Wars: The Clone Wars.

In the episode "The Mandalore Plot", Obi-Wan Kenobi mentions his encounter with Jango to Prime Minister Almec of Mandalore, who dismisses Fett's ties to the Mandalorian culture.
In the episode "Clone Cadets", Prime Minister Lama Su of Kamino laments that Fett's death has resulted in the Kaminoan cloners' supply of his DNA being stretched thin.
A hologram of Fett appears in the following episode, "ARC Troopers".
In a three-episode story arc comprising "Death Trap", "R2 Come Home", and "Lethal Trackdown", Boba Fett works with fellow bounty hunters to exact revenge against Mace Windu for the latter killing his father.
The boy sacrifices Jango's helmet to bait Windu toward an explosive device hidden inside it, though Windu senses the trap and survives.
After Boba is apprehended by the Republic, he vows to never forgive the Jedi for his father's death.

====
The Mandalorian ====
Jango is mentioned several times in the second-season episode "Chapter 14:
The Tragedy" of The Mandalorian streaming television series.
Boba reveals that his armor (which he reclaims from the title character) is the very suit once worn by his father and thus his birthright.
Between Boba's dialog and the holographic "chain code" he shows the protagonist, it is established that Jango was adopted into the Mandalorian culture by his mentor, Jaster; that he hailed from Concord Dawn; and that he fought in the Mandalorian Civil Wars—elements all broadly reflective of the character's backstory in the non-canonical comic Jango Fett: Open Seasons.

===
Canonical literature ===
Jango is the protagonist of the Marvel Comics one-shot Star Wars:
Age of Republic – Jango Fett (2019).
===
Legends ===
In April 2014, most of the licensed Star Wars novels, comics, video games, and other works produced since the original 1977 film were rebranded by Lucasfilm as Star Wars Legends and declared non-canonical to the franchise going forward.

====
Video games ====
Star Wars:
Bounty Hunter features Jango Fett as the playable character.
The game depicts Jango during his prime as a bounty hunter, providing the backstory to his role in Attack of the Clones.
Fett is entangled in an extensive "death stick" trafficking conspiracy, which ends with him defeating fallen Jedi Komari Vosa and outgunning his longtime rival Montross, a fellow Mandalorian.
The whole ordeal is actually a trial organized by Count Dooku to find a suitable candidate to be the genetic template of the clone army.

Fett makes further playable appearances in Star Wars: Jedi Starfighter, Lego Star Wars, Star Wars: Battlefront, Lego Star Wars II, Lego Star Wars: The Complete Saga, Lego Star Wars:
The Force Awakens, Star Wars: Battlefront II, and Star Wars Battlefront: Renegade Squadron.
The character even leaves the Star Wars brand by having a guest appearance in Tony Hawk's Pro Skater 4 as an unlockable character.
He also appears as a boss fight in the video game adaptation of Star Wars Episode II:
Attack of the Clones and the PlayStation Portable version of Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed.

Additionally, an evil pig version of Jango Fett (called "Jango Fatt") is a playable character in Angry Birds Star Wars II, alongside his son "Boba Fatt" and clone troopers.

====
Literature ====
Fett appears in the Dark Horse comic books Jango Fett, Jango Fett: Open Seasons, and the Toys "R" Us promotional comic Full of Surprises.

He also appears in the Star Wars:
Adventures books Jango Fett vs. The Razor Eaters, The Shape Shifter Strikes, and Warlords of Balmorra.

The character was also in the Jedi Readers book Jango Fett: Bounty Hunter, in Boba Fett: The Fight to Survive, and the novelization of Episode II – Attack of the Clones.

=====
Jango Fett:
Open Seasons =====
Jango Fett:
Open Seasons is a comic written by Hayden Blackman and published on 29 January 2003.
The story begins shortly after the events of Episode I – The Phantom Menace, with long flashbacks to earlier periods.

26 years before the events of The Phantom Menace, the Mandalorians split into two factions: the barbaric Death Watch, led by Tor Vizsla, and the True Mandalorians, honorable mercenaries led by Jaster Mereel.
The two factions battle on Jango's homeworld of Concord Dawn.
Jango's family helps Jaster, inciting Vizsla and his men to kill them.
A young Jango is the only survivor and, while horrified, helps Jaster and his men escape and ambush Death Watch.
Jaster subsequently adopts Jango and welcomes him into his faction.

Years later, Jango has become a full-fledged Mandalorian warrior under Jaster's tutelage.
The Mandalorians are ambushed by Death Watch, and Jaster is killed by Vizsla.
Sporting Jaster's armor, Jango becomes the new leader of the True Mandalorians.
A Jedi strike force led by Count Dooku slays Jango's warriors, and Jango is sold into slavery to the planet's governor.
Jango later escapes, attacks Death Watch and kills Vizsla, before beginning pursuing a career as a bounty hunter.
Dooku, under instructions from his master, Darth Sidious, pits the most notorious mercenaries of the galaxy against each other in order to select a genetic template for an army of clones.
Fett emerges victorious and in a tense meeting with Dooku, requests one thing in return for donating his DNA:
an unmodified clone to be his son and apprentice.

==
Popular culture ==
Pop culture website
IGN named Jango Fett as the 30th greatest Star Wars character in their Top 100 countdown, citing his calm, effective demeanor and prowess in combat, despite not possessing a connection with the Force.
While not as popular as Boba Fett, he nonetheless became a very well-known figure in popular culture.

== See also ==
Space Western


==
References ==
Footnotes
Citations


==
External links ==
Jango Fett in the StarWars.com Databank
Jango Fett on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Jango Fett on IMDb
Paz Vizsla is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise who appears in the Disney+ television series The Mandalorian.
He is a member of a tribe of Mandalorian warriors along with the show's protagonist, who is known simply as "The Mandalorian".
Paz initially clashes with him, but later assists the Mandalorian's rescue of "The Child" from a remnant of the Galactic Empire.

Strong and physically imposing, Paz is a heavy infantry fighter who uses a large minigun-like blaster, as well as a jet pack.
Paz Vizsla is voiced by Jon Favreau, the creator and showrunner of The Mandalorian.
Favreau also voiced Pre Vizsla, another Mandalorian character with the same last name, in the computer-animated television series
Star Wars: The Clone Wars.
In-universe, Viszla is the name of one of the largest Mandalorian clans, so it makes sense that another character with the same last name would appear (though it is unknown if Paz was born into the clan or if he was a Foundling).
The live-action body double for Paz Vizsla was Tait Fletcher, a stunt performer and former mixed martial artist, who also played a different character in the season premiere of The Mandalorian.

Paz Vizsla has received a positive response from fans and reviewers; Inverse writer Jake Kleinman called him a "fan-favorite character" who made a large impact despite his relatively brief running time.
Several action figures and toys of the character have been produced and sold.

== Appearances ==
Paz Vizsla is one of the Mandalorian warriors in the tribe on a secret enclave on the planet Nevarro led by the Armorer during the events of the first season of the Star Wars television series The Mandalorian.
The Mandalorians are in hiding after having suffered persecution by the Galactic Empire, and although the Empire has fallen out of power by this time, the clan has not yet regained its former status.
Paz is a heavy infantry fighter, who uses a large minigun-like blaster, as well as a jet pack.
He appears in the episode "Chapter 3: The Sin".
When the show's title character, a bounty hunter known simply as "The Mandalorian", brings beskar steel to the Armorer for her to forge him new armor, Paz angrily observes that the steel was provided by a remnant of the Empire.
Paz objects to the Mandalorian collaborating with Imperials, and the two of them draw knives and begin to fight each other as a result, but they stop when the Armorer intervenes.
Later in the episode, when the Mandalorian is attacked by multiple bounty hunters after he rescued a young alien known as "The Child" from the Imperial remnant, multiple Mandalorian warriors come out of hiding to assist the Mandalorian and attack the bounty hunters, including Paz.
The episode ends with Paz using his jet pack to fly alongside the Mandalorian's spaceship, with Paz saluting the Mandalorian before flying away.
As a result of revealing their presence, the Mandalorian tribe is later destroyed by the Imperials.
However, the Armorer noted that some of the warriors may have escaped off-world, leaving Paz's fate unknown.
A pile of helmets belonging to the slain warriors are shown in the season finale "Chapter 8: Redemption", and fans have noted that Paz's helmet was not among them, suggesting his possible survival.
==
Characterization ==
Paz Vizsla is physically imposing, displaying great height and tremendous strength.
Tough and aggressive, he is good in a fight, as seen by his efficiency in attacking and repelling multiple bounty hunters during the climactic scene in "Chapter 3: The Sin".
Paz has a brash and confident personality, and is more outspoken than most of the other Mandalorians in his tribe; Scott Snowden of Space.com called him "the alpha-Mandalorian in the room".
Paz despises the Galactic Empire due to its persecution and destruction of the Mandalorian people.
His hatred for the Empire runs so deep that he opposes any collaboration or association with them whatsoever.
This distinguishes him from the show's title character, the Mandalorian, who reluctantly accepts a bounty hunting assignment from Imperials, a decision that ultimately leads to a brief physical skirmish between him and Paz.
However, Paz has a respect for the Mandalorian culture and his tribe that supersedes his personal feelings of distaste toward the Empire.
This is displayed by the fact that he willing to step down from his fight with the Mandalorian when the tribe's leader, the Armorer, reminds them of the moral code and way of the Mandalorian people.
Despite their previous differences, Paz and the Mandalorian ultimately display a mutual respect for each other.
This is demonstrated by his willingness to place his own safety and that of his tribe at risk to help the Mandalorian at the end of "Chapter 3: The Sin".
When the Mandalorian notes that this action places the sanctuary of the tribe's enclave at risk, Paz responds with the clan's credo, "This is the Way", highlighting his respect for both the tribe and for the Mandalorian himself.
Snowden called this "a genuine lump-in-the-throat moment as the Mandalorian's comrades have sacrificed everything to help the bounty hunter do the right thing".
The mutual admiration between Paz and the Mandalorian is also evident in their final scene together, when Paz salutes the Mandalorian before they part ways.

==
Portrayal ==
Paz Vizsla is voiced by Jon Favreau, the creator and showrunner of The Mandalorian.
Favreau also previously voiced a Mandalorian warlord named Pre Vizsla on the computer-animated television series Star Wars: The Clone Wars, though any possible relation between Paz and Pre remains unknown.
Tait Fletcher, a stunt performer and former mixed martial artist, was the live-action body double for Paz Vizsla, with his face unseen due to Paz's helmet.
Fletcher also appeared in the series premiere "Chapter 1: The Mandalorian", in which he played an unnamed man who gets into a bar fight with the Mandalorian.
That was the role Fletcher initially accepted when he joined The Mandalorian, and was not aware he would also be playing Paz Vizsla until later.
He described Paz as "a galvanizing character that really exposes the ferocity and dignity with which we hold the Code of the Mandalorians."
Paz Vizsla's name is not spoken in "Chapter 3: The Sin", but the character is identified by name in the closing credits.

==
Critical reception ==
Paz Vizsla has received a positive response from fans and reviewers.
Inverse writer Jake Kleinman called him a "fan-favorite character" who "made a big splash" despite his relatively brief running time, particularly describing his salute to the Mandalorian as an "iconic" moment.
Bayani Miguel Acebedo of Epicstream described him as "undoubtedly one of the more memorable Mandos in the show".
James Whitbrook of Gizmodo called him a "badass character" and "unsung hero" of the series who "looks cool as hell".
Niner Times writer Noah Howell called the character "just the best", and particularly praised the scene in which Paz and the other Mandalorians rescue the protagonist at the end of "Chapter 3: The Sin".
A headline for a /Film story by Ethan Anderton described him as an "awesome new The Mandalorian character that isn't Baby Yoda".
Christopher Marc of HN Entertainment called Paz an "interesting new character" who he hopes to see again.
Scott Snowden of Space.com said he "looks like the product of a marriage twixt Boba Fett and War Machine".

==
Merchandise ==
An action figure of Paz Vizsla has been released by Hot Toys, though it is identified only as "Heavy Infantry Mandalorian".
The figure is 12.5 in (32 cm) in height, taller than most Star Wars Hot Toys figurines due to the character's larger size, and includes such accessories as a minigun blaster, alternate hands, a knife, a themed base to pose him upon, and special effects pieces for his jetpack to simulate rocket blasts.
Additionally, a Funko Pop figurine of Paz Vizsla was announced on December 31, 2019.
Hasbro also released a 6 in (15 cm) action figure of Paz as part of the company's Star Wars:
The Black Series toy line.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Paz Vizsla on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Captain Rex, later Commander Rex, designation number CT-7567, is a fictional character in the Star Wars space fantasy universe created by George Lucas and a main character of the animated The Clone Wars 2008 film and the related television series of the same name.
He is a clone trooper of the Grand Army of the Republic, cloned from Mandalorian bounty hunter Jango Fett, and serves the Galactic Republic under the command of Jedi General Anakin Skywalker and Jedi Commander Ahsoka Tano.
Since his introduction in The Clone Wars, he has also appeared in the 2014 Star Wars Rebels television series and various spin-off media.
Like all clone troopers in The Clone Wars and Rebels, Rex is voiced by Dee Bradley Baker.

He is physically distinguished from other clone troopers by his close-shaved blond hair, and he is identified by blue markings on his armor and by stylized hawk eyes painted on his helmet.
Rex was also distinguished by his use of twin blaster pistols in combat.

He is described as a reliable and exemplary soldier, considered by Anakin to be his "first-in-command".
Rex is characterized as believing it is his duty to not only carry out orders but also to protect the men under his command; however, his belief in the Republic wavers over the course of the series.

Initial development for The Clone Wars film chose Alpha-17, featured in Star Wars: Republic, to be the primary clone trooper character.
However, Lucas felt this created too much alliteration with the existing principal cast, and a new character was created instead.
Rex was developed as the central personality to which the troopers around him aspired and featured in story arcs exploring his character development.
Rex became a favorite among fans, consistently placing in fan polls and Star Wars character ranking lists.

== Creation and development ==
Initial development for The Clone Wars film chose Alpha-17, featured in the Star Wars: Republic comic, to be the principal clone trooper character.
However, because Anakin Skywalker, Ahsoka Tano, and R2-D2 (Artoo) were also principal characters, Star Wars creator George Lucas felt Alpha's name created too much alliteration between the main cast, and a new character, Captain Rex, was created instead.
The name "Rex" was chosen by Lucas.
Previously, the name Captain Rex was used for the error-prone rookie droid pilot RX-24 of Star Tours, who replaced an earlier concept of an unpredictable and risk-taking Clone Wars veteran.
Voice actor Dee Bradley Baker voices all the clone trooper characters in The Clone Wars, including Rex.
To differentiate the characters, Baker considered the personality traits of every clone, choosing one or two adjectives for each, and recorded each character separately.
To aid with the vocal performance, Baker and supervising director Dave Filoni developed a "clone triangle" that arranged the characters by personality.
Rex, characterized as the central personality type to which the other clones aspired, was placed in the center, and the other clones, who represented an excess of certain traits relative to Rex, were placed around the edges of the triangle.
Filoni wished most for the series to address the fates of Rex and Ahsoka because they do not appear in Star Wars:
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith, which was released before The Clone Wars but is set after the series' timeline.
In April 2011, he hinted that the two characters' stories were possibly connected and remarked: "A lot of people say they want to know more about [Ahsoka], and along with that goes Rex."
He also voiced the production team's conscious effort to write story arcs for Rex: "I think one of the other things is we have such a great development of Rex that we really want to keep telling Rex's story and things centered around Rex."
==
Characterization and appearance ==
The official Star Wars Databank describes Rex as a "no-nonsense, by the book" and "exemplary clone trooper, brave under fire and dedicated to the men serving under him" who must adjust to his "maverick" and "headstrong" Jedi commanding officers.
His training is described as having instilled a belief that a soldier's highest calling is duty, though his belief wavers over the course of the Clone Wars and he comes to question the purpose of the conflict.
The entry characterized Rex as coming to admire and even imitate Anakin Skywalker's improvisation and willingness to bend rules.
In "Darkness on Umbara", Anakin describes Rex as his "first-in-command" and second-to-none in loyalty or capability.

Rex is distinguished by close-shaved blond hair and stylized hawk eyes adorning his helmets; like all members of the 501st, his armor bears blue markings.
Later in the series, Rex's armor bears tally marks, representing kills, and Filoni felt it communicated that Rex "is becoming something of a little legend" because he is "a long term survivor of the Clone Wars".
He also bears a scar on his chin in homage to actor Harrison Ford, who played Han Solo in the original trilogy.

Rex's later helmet design,  first appearing in season four, was composed of elements from both the older Episode II-style and the newer Episode III-style designs.
The T-shaped visor of his new helmet used the old visor design as a base and retained the old proportions, requiring some elements to be lowered to fit.
Filoni developed an in-universe backstory for the design and felt that Rex "trying to wear the same armor" by welding together a hybrid version was a good character trait that added to his uniqueness.
Filoni also characterized this specialized helmet and "hodgepodge of old gear and new gear" as indicative of Rex's distrust in the quality of the new armor and Rex's belief that with "classic stuff, the craftsmanship is a little better".
Rex continues to wear his helmet and parts of his clone trooper armor in his Rebels appearances.

==
Fictional history ==


===
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars ==
=
Introduced in The Clone Wars animated film and featured throughout the television series of the same name, Captain Rex, designation number CT-7567, is the commanding officer of Torrent Company within the 501st
Legion under the command of Jedi General Anakin Skywalker and Jedi Padawan Commander Ahsoka Tano.
He fights as a soldier of the Grand Army of the Republic in numerous campaigns of the Clone Wars against the Separatist battle droid army.
As a clone trooper, he was cloned on Kamino from bounty hunter Jango Fett and ages at an accelerated rate, aging twenty years in ten years.
As Anakin’s Clone Captain, he goes on many missions with Anakin and his Padawan Ahsoka Tano, sharing Anakin’s quick-thinking skills and recklessness at times.

In a season four story arc, the 501st Legion is temporarily led by Jedi General Pong Krell.
In the face of Krell's callousness toward clone lives and refusal to treat the troopers as individuals instead of numbered units, Rex is caught between his duty to follow Krell's orders and his responsibility to protect his men.
Despite growing discontent in the ranks and calls for dissent from Fives, Rex does not openly defy Krell.
However, Rex supports a mission led by Fives that is expressly forbidden by Krell but saves numerous clone trooper lives.
After orders causes the 501st Legion and the 212th Attack Battalion to unknowingly attack one another, Rex leads the troopers to arrest Krell, who reveals he has turned to the dark side, admits he has been deliberately sabotaging the clones, and is later executed by clone trooper Dogma.
Rex is also involved in a season six story arc centering on a conspiracy regarding the clone troopers.
Fives discovers that inhibitor chips are secretly implanted into the clone troopers' brains and can be used to turn them against the Jedi.
He reveals this to Rex before he dies.
Rex is a principal character in the Bad Batch story arc, an unfinished story arc released as completed animatics.
Shortly after Fives' death, Rex discovers a transmission from Echo, previously apparently killed in action, and leads a successful mission to rescue him.
At Star Wars Celebration 2016, Filoni stated that Rex participates in the siege of Mandalore, the intended final story arc before the series' cancellation.
Set during Revenge of the Sith, the arc sees Rex, promoted to commander, leading half of the 501st
Legion reassigned to Ahsoka, who previously relinquished command upon leaving the Jedi Order, into an assault of Mandalore, with the intent of capturing the former Sith Lord Darth Maul.
Though the assault is successful and Maul's forces are defeated, with Maul himself captured, Palpatine, who has revealed himself as Darth Sidious, issues Order 66, causing Ahsoka's clone troopers to turn on her, including Rex; however, Rex is able to resist the order long enough to warn Ahsoka.
As a result, Ahsoka escapes and manages to remove Rex's chip, restoring his free will.
For his treachery against the Republic, ARC Trooper Jesse demotes Rex to Captain and orders his execution.
Rex and Ahsoka manage to escape the cruiser they are on before it crashes into the planet below.
After the impact, Rex and Ahsoka bury Jesse and the dead clones in a mass grave, marking it with the helmets of the fallen clones.
The pair then fake their deaths and part ways, both going into hiding for years to come.
These story arcs were completed and aired when The Clone Wars returned for a seventh season in 2020.

===
Star Wars Rebels ===
Rex is introduced to the Star Wars Rebels television series  in the season two episode "The Lost Commanders", set fifteen years after Revenge of the Sith.
Now seemingly a much older man due to accelerated aging, Rex lives with fellow clone troopers Commander Wolffe and Captain Gregor.
The three are sought by the Ghost crew upon instructions from Ahsoka, and they ask the troopers for help in establishing a new rebel base.
Though the three have had their inhibitor chips removed, allowing them to ignore Order 66, former Padawan Kanan Jarrus initially distrusts them.
Wolffe, fearing the consequences for aiding rebels and Jedi, contacts the Galactic Empire to protect the clones.
However, Rex convinces Wolffe the rebels can be trusted and repels the Empire, in turn earning Kanan's trust.
Rex leaves Wolffe and Gregor to join the Rebel Alliance and to fight alongside the Ghost crew and Ahsoka against the Empire.
In the epilogue of the series finale "Family Reunion - and Farewell", it is revealed that he was promoted to commander again and fought with Hera at the Battle of Endor.

===
In other media ===
Since his introduction in The Clone Wars, Rex has also appeared in comics, novels, and video games of the Star Wars Expanded Universe, also known as Star Wars Legends.

In March 2016, Filoni supported the former fan theory of Rex being the older member of Han Solo's raiding party, previously known in Legends continuity as Nik Sant, on Endor in Return of the Jedi.
In August 2017, writer Steven Melching shared concept art for the fourth season of Star Wars Rebels, and it was reported as a confirmation of this theory, making the first .
Melching later clarified that at that time he was not aware if Rex and Sant are the same character, stating that due to the progression of the series, Rex's costume would naturally come to resemble those worn by Rebel Alliance commandos in Return of the Jedi.
In a June 2019 episode of Star Wars Galaxy of Adventures, Rex appears in a Battle of Endor scene in the same pose and location as Sant in Return of the Jedi, retroactively implying they are the same character.

==
Merchandise ==
Rex was the featured character for the 2010 Star Wars merchandise trade dress created by Pilot Studio.
The concept initially featured Anakin Skywalker, but discussions of other characters best suited to representing the brand led to Rex, "a strong, courageous character who is clearly one of the heroes of The Clone Wars".
Pilot Studio was initially reluctant to use Rex because his helmet did not allow for eye contact, an emphasized element in the initial trade dress concept.

== Reception ==
Captain Rex became a favorite among fans.
Filoni noted that while older fans were excited to see
Grand Moff Tarkin and Chewbacca appear in the series, younger fans appeared to prefer characters like Rex.
Baker was surprised Rex became well-liked because the clone troopers were not established as distinct characters in the films.
Rex was ranked 36 in IGN's Top 100 Star Wars characters, where he was described as having a "silly name" but "bad ass".
His ability to evolve and adapt as a character and as a soldier was noted, especially his change from scorn to sympathy toward a clone trooper deserter.
Eric Goldman felt that the Rebels reunion between Rex and Ahsoka was a poignant moment and the emotional highlight of "Relics of the Old Republic".
He also noted that Rex's reintroduction and Ahsoka's complete trust in him raised more questions about Rex in the time between The Clone Wars and Rebels.

== Notes ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Clone Captain Rex in the StarWars.com Databank
CT-7567 on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Captain Rex on IMDb
Wedge Antilles is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise.
He is a supporting character portrayed by Denis Lawson in the original Star Wars trilogy.
He is also featured in the Star Wars expanded universe, most notably as the lead character in most of the X-Wing novels.
Wedge has also appeared in the sequel trilogy film The Rise of Skywalker (2019), with Lawson reprising his role, and the 2014 animated series Star Wars Rebels, voiced by Nathan Kress.

Before defecting to the Rebel Alliance, Antilles was an Imperial cadet (callsign:
TIE SS25) of the Skystrike Academy.
Antilles founded Rogue Squadron with his friend Luke Skywalker.
His superior piloting skills, in-depth knowledge of Imperial military doctrine, and tactical leadership quickly propelled him though the ranks to become Marshal of the Alliance Starfighter Corps.
Wedge is notable for having participated in more starfighter battles ending with decisive victories than any other character: he led the allied assault during the Battle of Exegol; he piloted a snowspeeder in the defense of Echo Base on Hoth; and is the only Rebel starfighter pilot to have survived both attack runs on the Death Stars at the battles of Yavin and Endor.

== Depiction ==
Wedge first appears in Star Wars during the Rebels' Death Star attack briefing.
In this scene Wedge is portrayed by Colin Higgins and voiced by David Ankrum, who dubs the character throughout the film.
Denis Lawson plays the character for the remaining scenes filmed in the X-wing cockpit.
Lawson also portrays Antilles in The Empire Strikes Back, Return of the Jedi and The Rise of Skywalker.
Lawson used his own voice in these films, masking his natural Scottish accent with an imitation of an American accent.
Ankrum reprised his role as the voice of Wedge in Rogue One.
Coincidentally, Denis Lawson is the maternal uncle of Ewan McGregor, who played Obi-Wan Kenobi in the prequel trilogy.

==
Appearances ==


===
Films ===
Wedge appears towards the end of Star Wars as "Red Two", an X-wing pilot and a member of Red Squadron.
His considerable dogfighting prowess is shown in the Battle of Yavin when he saves Luke Skywalker by shooting down a TIE fighter that Luke had been unable to shake off with a head-on, high deflection angle shot.
Along with Luke and Biggs Darklighter, he is one of only three X-wing pilots to survive until the final attack runs along the Death Star's trench.
However, his X-wing is damaged, and he is forced to disengage before the Death Star is destroyed.
He and Luke are the only two X-Wing pilots to survive the battle, along with a Y-wing and the Millennium Falcon.
Wedge appears in The Empire Strikes Back as a member of the newly formed Rogue Squadron.
He flies a snowspeeder under the callsign "Rogue Three" against the Empire's AT-AT ground assault with Wes Janson as his harpoon gunner.
Their snowspeeder inflicts the first casualty against the AT-AT attack group by firing a harpoon trailing a tow cable into one of the walker's legs and circling the walker several times, causing it to trip and fall and allowing Rebel forces to destroy the walker.
After the battle, Wedge is seen and heard wishing Luke a safe trip.
Wedge appears towards the end of Return of the Jedi as the leader of Red Squadron in the Battle of Endor.
Along with Lando Calrissian, who pilots the Millennium Falcon with Nien Nunb, he leads the fighter attack on the second Death Star.
His dogfighting prowess is shown again in this battle, as Wedge personally shoots down a number of Imperial TIE fighters, and appears to easily navigate the narrow and treacherous flight spaces inside the Death Star that lead to its core.
When he and Lando reach the Death Star's core, Wedge destroys the power regulator on the core's north tower, while Lando destroys the core itself.
He later appears at the victory celebration at the Ewok village on Endor.
Wedge appears, once again played by Denis Lawson, in the final installment of the Star Wars sequel trilogy, The Rise of Skywalker.
He is seen manning a gun turret on the Millennium Falcon during the battle between the Resistance and the Sith Eternal, shortly after the death of his stepson Snap.
Lawson had previously been asked to appear as Wedge in The Force Awakens, in the narrative role the character Poe Dameron was ultimately created for, but declined due to scheduling conflicts.
Wedge is not seen on screen in the spinoff film Rogue One, but his voice is briefly heard over the intercom in the Rebel base on Yavin 4.
He was intentionally omitted from the film's climactic battle in order to avoid a continuity error with the first Star Wars film, which takes place immediately after Rogue One.

===
Television ===
In the television series Star Wars Rebels, Wedge is voiced by Nathan Kress.
He first appeared in the episode
The Antilles Extraction, the fourth episode of the third season.
The episode establishes Wedge's canon backstory as an Imperial TIE fighter pilot who with the help of Sabine Wren defected from the Empire, and joined the Rebel Alliance.
Wedge later appeared in the episode "Double Agent Droid," the nineteenth episode of the third season, and again in both parts of the third season finale Zero Hour, the twenty-first and twenty-second episodes, respectively.
Wedge's last appearance in Rebels was in the first part of "In the Name of the Rebellion", the third episode of the fourth season.

===
Novels ===
Wedge is featured in the Star Wars:
Aftermath trilogy by Chuck Wendig, consisting of the novels Aftermath (2015), Life Debt (2016), and Empire's End (2017).
In this series, Wedge establishes a new unit called Phantom Squadron, which sees action on the planets Kashyyyk and Jakku.
Following the Battle of Jakku, which ends the Galactic Civil War, Wedge relocates to Hosnian Prime, where he serves as a flight instructor.

Wedge makes a brief appearance in Claudia Gray's 2015 novel Star Wars: Lost Stars, in which he recruits Thane Kyrell, one of the novel's protagonists, into the Rebel Alliance.

Wedge later moves to the planet Akiva where he retires with Norra Wexley.
The two appear in the 2019 novel Star Wars:
Resistance Reborn where they join a Resistance mission to save some political prisoners on Corellia.
===
Legends ===
In April 2014, most of the licensed Star Wars novels and comics produced since the originating 1977 film Star Wars were rebranded by Lucasfilm as Star Wars Legends and declared non-canon to the franchise.
Wedge appears in the 1983 Marvel Star Wars comic "Hoth Stuff!",
in which it is revealed that he went missing during the Battle of Hoth.
Aboard his ship, Luke and Leia listen to his log tape recounting how he survived the Imperial invasion by hiding with Janson in the AT-AT Luke took down.
They were prevented from contacting the Rebellion from orbiting TIE fighters and had to face wampas and other dangers.
Janson was eventually killed by scavengers; Wedge then stole one of their ships to escape the planet and contact the Rebellion.
He suddenly appears outside one of the windows, after working on the ship from space.
Leia also states that Wedge and Luke grew up together on Tatooine, which Wedge seems to confirm in his log by mentioning a girlfriend he had there.

Star Wars Legends literature explains that Wedge's parents were killed when their starship-refueling depot exploded.
He piloted a freighter before joining the Rebel Alliance as a starfighter pilot.
Wedge is the lead character in most of the Star Wars: X-Wing novels by Michael A. Stackpole and Aaron Allston, set in the Star Wars expanded universe.
Several Dark Horse Comics series focus on Wedge and Rogue Squadron, and the character also appears in other expanded universe works including the New Jedi Order and Legacy of the Force novels.
Wedge is one of two main player characters in the Rogue Squadron video game series (Luke Skywalker is the other), and Wedge appears as a minor character in Jedi Knight:
Jedi Academy, helping the player during one mission.
He is also a playable character in Lego Star Wars III: The Clone Wars.

==
In popular culture ==
IGN named Wedge the 24th greatest Star Wars character of all time, claiming "Wedge Antilles may be the most important ancillary character in the Star Wars universe".

Wedge was portrayed by three voice actors in the Star Wars radio series from National Public Radio:
Meshach Taylor in A New Hope, Don Scardino in The Empire
Strikes Back, and Jon Matthews in Return of the Jedi.

Two characters named Biggs and Wedge appear frequently in RPGs made by Square.
They are named for Antilles and another X-wing pilot, Biggs Darklighter.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Wedge Antilles in the StarWars.com Databank
Wedge Antilles on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Wedge Antilles on IMDb
Hunting for the fake Wedge - StarWars.com
Rogue Squadron is a starfighter squadron in the Star Wars franchise.
Many surviving members of Red Squadron, the Rebel X-wing attack force that Luke Skywalker joins during the Battle of Yavin in Star Wars (1977), later join Rogue Squadron.
The squadron appears in The Empire Strikes Back (1980) as Rogue Group.

Rogue Squadron is prominently featured in the comic book series Star Wars: X-wing Rogue Squadron, the ten-volume novel series Star Wars: X-wing, and the Rogue Squadron video game series.
The unit is depicted as consisting of "the best pilots and the best fighters".
Following the release of the Star Wars anthology series film, Rogue One, it was established in other works that the squadron was named in honor of the Rogue One squad who sacrificed themselves to obtain the vital plans to the Death Star.

An upcoming film titled Rogue Squadron is being directed by Patty Jenkins.

== Depiction in film ==
Red Squadron, the forerunner of Rogue Squadron, is first featured as a Rebel Alliance division in A New Hope (1977) during the attack on the first Death Star.
This appearance features many notable pilots, including Biggs Darklighter ("Red Three"), Jek Porkins ("Red Six"), Wedge Antilles ("Red Two"), and Luke Skywalker ("Red Five").
The squadron went on to appear in The Empire Strikes Back at the Battle of Hoth and in Return of the Jedi during the attack on the second Death Star.
The squadron was never a prominent feature of these films, and was rarely referred to as "Rogue Squadron" (rather, the "Red Squadron" designation is used).

In the films' plot, Red Squadron is essential to the destruction of the Death Star at the Battle of Yavin, where they engaged in a dogfight against Darth Vader.
They use X-wing starfighters for the assault.
Jek Porkins, Biggs Darklighter, and most of the Squadron dies.
Wedge leaves too damaged to continue.
Luke would have died, had not being saved by Han Solo and Chewbacca piloting the Millennium Falcon, and giving Luke time to deliver the shot that destroyed the Death Star.
Luke Skywalker and Wedge Antilles are the only members of Red Squadron to survive the assault.

The Rogue Squadron on the ice planet Hoth, during The Empire Strikes Back, has the burden of defending Echo Base with new pilots added to their roster, like Derek Klivian and Tycho Celchu.
During the Battle of Hoth.
The twelve snowspeeders of the Rogues gave the Rebels enough time to evacuate Echo Base and were destroyed later in the battle.
Luke and Wedge survive.

After the evacuation of Hoth, Antilles took command during the absence of Skywalker while he trained with Yoda at Dagobah.
After the events of The Empire Strikes Back, Skywalker and Antilles formed a squadron of twelve units around the core group and the Rogue Squadron
was formed.
Antilles often commanded the squadron when Luke had important off-flight missions.

During the Battle of Endor on Return of the Jedi, Rogue Squadron was dissolved and absorbed into the general fleet and Antilles
took the role of Red Leader, in memory of the Battle of Yavin.
Luke is busy helping on the ground as a Jedi, and Wedge destroys the second Death Star with the aid of Lando Calrissian and Nien Numb, who pilot the Millennium Falcon.

The anthology film Rogue One, set shortly before A New Hope, features many of the pilots who fought on the Death Star fighting on the battle of Scarif, where Jyn Erso leads a group of Rebels called Rogue One, in an on-foot mission to steal the plans of the original Death Star.
Unable to leave the planet, team Rogue One beams the plans to Leia's ship.
Minutes later, all Rogue One members are killed by the Death Star.
Since the release of the prequel, the Rogue Squadron has been hinted and later revealed to have named itself in the memory of the Rogue One team.

===
Rogue Squadron (2023) ===
During Disney Investor Day 2020, Lucasfilm revealed that Patty Jenkins would direct a film titled Rogue Squadron, which will be released on Christmas 2023.
According to StarWars.com, the film "will introduce a new generation of starfighter pilots as they earn their wings and risk their lives in a boundary-pushing, high-speed thrill-ride, and move the saga into the future era of the galaxy."
According to Jenkins, the film will be "something original with great influence from the games and the books.
There's a lot of things being acknowledged and understood about the greatness of all of those things, but yes, it's an original story
and I'm so psyched to do it."
==
Notable pilots ==
These are the pilots featured in the films and the canon of Star Wars.

===
Garven Dreis ===
He is the leader of Rogue Squadron during the battle of Yavin 4 in A New Hope (played by Drewe Henley).

He is killed by Vader.

===
Luke Skywalker ===
Luke Skywalker's debut with the Rebel Alliance came as Red Five at the Battle of Yavin, as portrayed in A New Hope.
After his destruction of the Death Star, he founded Rogue Squadron with Wedge's help using the Rebels' best X-wing pilots as shown in the video game Rogue Squadron and proceeded to have a long and distinguished flying career with the group.
By the time of Return of the Jedi, Luke was focusing on his training as a Jedi Knight and had thus handed command of Rogue Squadron to Wedge.

The last mission of Rogue Squadron takes place six years after the Battle of Endor, during Dark Empire.

===
Wedge Antilles ===
Although Luke Skywalker was the first commander of Rogue Squadron, Antilles is often considered the "face" of the squadron due to his tenure as its leader.
He appears in the films A New Hope, The Empire Strikes Back, and Return of the Jedi, in which he commands the squadron.
When seeing the Death Star for the first time in A New Hope, Wedge utters the line "Look at the size of that thing!"

Wedge has a unique situation casting-wise.
Colin Higgins portrayed him during the Rebel briefing for the Battle of Yavin, where he expresses his doubt that even a computer could shoot a proton torpedo down the Death Star's thermal exhaust port.
In every other scene, Denis Lawson portrays Wedge.
Wedge appears in season 3 of Star Wars: Rebels, where he is voiced by Nathan Kress.

===
Biggs Darklighter ===
Biggs Darklighter briefly appeared in A New Hope played by Garrick Hagon.
Biggs was in the Battle of Yavin scene, where he joined his childhood friend Luke Skywalker and Luke's other wingman, Wedge, in their attack run on the first Death Star.

Biggs had a larger role in earlier drafts of the script for the movie and several of the additional scenes appeared in the novelization.
His additional scenes include a conversation with Luke on Tatooine where Biggs tells Luke of his secret desire to join the Rebel Alliance despite his training at the Imperial Academy.
This scene was deleted from A New Hope, but the book Inside the Worlds of the Star Wars Trilogy depicts the missing scene at Tosche Station, and it can be seen in its entirety on the encyclopedic Star Wars: Behind the Magic CD-ROM and on the Blu-ray release of A New Hope.
Biggs also shows up on Yavin 4 in the Rebel base hangar where he is reunited with his childhood best friend Luke and helped convince Red Squadron to allow Luke to join the squadron about to depart towards the Battle of Yavin.
Biggs assures Red Squadron leader Garvin Dreis that Luke can handle the X-wing, calling him the best bush pilot in the Outer Rim.
This scene was reintroduced in the 1997 re-release of the film.
However, a line in which Dreis referred to Luke's father Anakin and said that "if he had his skill he would do fine" remained on the cutting room floor.
While flanking Luke's X-wing on its decisive attack run, Biggs was shot down and killed by Darth Vader.

Biggs has a larger role in the Legends non-canonical storyline.
In the radio version, Kale Browne provided the voice of Biggs.
According to a Dark Horse four-issue comic series in Star Wars: Empire spotlighting Biggs entitled Darklighter, Biggs was a longtime friend of Luke's on Tatooine.
Biggs left Tatooine to be trained as an Imperial pilot, and during this training, he heard rumors of the Death Star from fellow trainees.
After several months training, he was assigned as first mate on the Imperial starship Rand Ecliptic, with an old enemy named Derek Klivian (nicknamed Hobbie) as second mate.
He came back to visit Tatooine to tell his friends and family of his new assignment but only tells Luke and his family of his hope to join the Rebel Alliance.
During the events of A New Hope, Biggs is planning a mutiny of the Rand Ecliptic, not realizing that several mutinies are being planned by several different groups.
He joins forces with Hobbie, one of the leaders, and the two go AWOL to Yavin 4.
Biggs becomes a part of the Alliance's missions to steal their first R2 units and X-wings, which they receive just days before the Battle of Yavin.
Before going to battle, Biggs saves Hobbie's life by finding medicine for a strange disease Hobbie caught on Yavin 4, which the Rebellion did not have a cure for.
The New Republic later named a military base on Coruscant in Biggs's honor.

=== Jek "Piggy" Porkins ===
Jek Tono Porkins is a famously overweight Red Squadron pilot whose death is depicted in A New Hope (played by William Hootkins) when his X-wing is destroyed after being hit by a piece of a broken laser battery crashing into the star fighter's frame.

Porkins gained prominence in the Legends non-canonical literature, most notably Stackpole's X-wing series.
He has also been occasionally parodied in popular media, most notably in the Family Guy Star Wars spoof Blue Harvest, in which he is depicted as being too fat to fit in his fighter and crashes.
===
Corran Horn ===
In the Star Wars Legends timeline, Corran Horn fought with Rogue Squadron.
Force-sensitive, Horn helped Rogue Squadron win the second Battle of Borelias, and was captured after helping capture Coruscant from the warlord Ysanne Isard.

===
Wes Janson ===
A minor character in the original films
, Janson only appears in The Empire Strikes Back in the role of Wedge Antilles' gunner at the Battle of Hoth.
He manages to take out the first AT-AT, emphasized by a terse "Cable detached!"
(
preceded by "Cable out, let her go!",
and Wedge's "Detach cable!"),
his only speaking role in the films.

In the Legends non-canonical literature, Janson was stranded with Wedge in the 1983 Marvel Star Wars comic "Hoth Stuff!
"
some time after the Battle of Hoth.
He was then killed by scavengers, and Wedge used one of their ships to escape the planet.

Janson is featured as a major character in Michael A. Stackpole's X-Wing comic book series as alternately Wedge and Hobbie's wingman and an integral member of the squadron.
Aaron Allston included the character in his installments in the X-wing novel series which followed from the comics, although Janson in those novels is prominent as a member of Wraith Squadron, not Rogue Squadron.
Janson also fought against the Yuuzhan Vong during the New Jedi Order series of novels, and kept an eye on Han Solo after the death of Chewbacca.
He was known as a skilled pilot and an expert shot, and personality-wise is known to be a joker.

In his early days as part of the Rebel Alliance was mainly a gunner in the two seated version of the Y-wing because of his shooting ability.
His first combat kill was New Republic pilot Kell Tainer's father during a botched mission where Doran was about to stray into an Imperial radar scan.
Despite repeated attempts to get him to change course, Janson was forced to shoot him down to save the rest of the squadron.
In the Wraith Squadron Series he was the first to implement the saying "Yub Yub Commander."
as a joke to Wedge after fooling him during the pilot interviews.
The rest of the squadron soon followed and Wedge was hounded by it for many years to come.
===
Tycho Celchu ===
Celchu never appears by name in the original film series, although he is attributed as the A-wing pilot that acts as a decoy for Lando Calrissian during the attack run on the second Death Star.

In the Legends non-canonical storyline Celchu, plays a major role in Stackpole's X-wing series, and also appears in numerous other novels, all of which give him a rich character background.
Celchu was an Imperial TIE fighter pilot that defected to the Rebel Alliance after his homeworld, Alderaan (also the homeworld of Princess Leia), was destroyed by the first Death Star, killing all of his immediate family and his fiancée.
Celchu's Imperial past drives much of the plot of Stackpole's X-wing novels, as he is continually suspected of being an undercover Imperial agent.
After the battle of Coruscant, Celchu was put on trial for treason and the murder of Corran Horn, but the prosecution dropped the case when Horn returned from the Lusankya.
Celchu also holds the noteworthy distinction of being one of very few Rebel pilots to have flown in the Hoth, Endor and Bakura campaigns.
This is a very rare accomplishment, and one that is matched by longtime wingman and friend Wedge Antillies.

=== Derek "Hobbie" Klivian ===
Klivian flies as Luke Skywalker's wingman during the Battle of Hoth.
Originally doomed to die when his snowspeeder crashes into General Veers' walker, his life was spared after that scene from the fourth draft was cut.

His first film appearance, was in Leia's briefing before the battle, when he questions the plan by rhetorically asking, "Two fighters against a Star Destroyer?".
Hobbie appears in season 3 of Rebels, where he is voiced by Trevor Devall.

In the non-canonical Legends literature and the Rogue Squadron video game series, it is said Hobbie is not only the most reckless pilot, he's also the luckiest, having crashed more fighters than all of Rogue Squadron and coming away from each of them unscathed.
He's generally the most dour of all the pilots, having a bleak outlook on life.
Despite this, Hobbie has a close camaraderie and friendship with Wes Janson, and often becomes involved in Janson's elaborate pranks and jokes at the expense of other pilots (especially Wedge).
Hobbie's sense of humor is extremely dry and sardonic, making for a good counterpoint to Janson's flamboyant and often silly wit.

=== Dak Ralter ===
Dak Ralter is depicted in The Empire Strikes Back as Luke Skywalker's gunner.
He was killed in battle by a flak explosion from an AT-AT's heavy guns during the Battle of Hoth.

In the Legends non-canonical storyline, he is featured on the video game
Star Wars: Rogue Squadron, with
Luke Skywalker saying that Dak "reminded him of a younger version of himself."
He was the son of political prisoners.

===
Zev Senesca ===
Zev Senesca, callsign Rogue Two, appears in The Empire Strikes Back, and is the pilot who locates Han Solo and Luke Skywalker after they get lost on Hoth at the beginning of the film.
In Rogue Squadron, he had been fighting longer than any other Rogues and had quite a few stories to tell.
Like Dak, he joined the rebellion for personal and political reasons.
He is killed when his speeder is shot down by Imperial walkers during the Battle of Hoth.

== Legends ==
With the 2012 acquisition of Lucasfilm by The Walt Disney Company, most of the licensed Star Wars novels and comics produced since the originating 1977 film were rebranded as Star Wars Legends and declared non-canon to the franchise in April 2014.In the Legends non-canonical storyline, the X-wing comic series, written by Michael A. Stackpole and published by Dark Horse Comics, were the first works of Star Wars literature to focus on the adventures and exploits of the squadron.
The comic series picked up with the reformation of the squadron after the Battle of Endor.
Stackpole went on to novelize the squadron's tale in his X-wing book series, which initially spanned four volumes.
Stackpole is credited as the creator of the character Corran Horn, who later starred in his own first-person novel, I, Jedi, also written by Stackpole.
Horn later became a popular character in the Expanded Universe, playing a major part in several New Jedi Order novels.
By the time of the events of The New Jedi Order, Horn was a Jedi Knight and no longer a member of the squadron, but the Rogues are still a vital fighting force and command a presence in several of the New Jedi Order novels as well.
The squadron is also the focus of the Rogue Squadron video game series.

In Dark Horse's eponymous Star Wars series (2013–14), set in the months after A New Hope, Leia has begun calling the former Red Squadron "Stealth Squadron", but Wedge reveals to Luke that he prefers the name "Rogue Squadron".
After A New Hope, the squadron is operated as two groups.
The first was the Renegade Flight under Commander Narra, the squadron leader, and the second was the Rogue Flight under Luke Skywalker.
As the Rogues became more autonomous, they became a group with no standing orders, ready any time or place for urgent missions that would arise.
Their core was Luke Skywalker, Wedge Antilles, Zev Senesca, and Wes Janson.
The Renegade Flight is eventually destroyed before The Empire Strikes Back on an escort mission with a convoy carrying supplies for the Rebel Base.
The Rogues on Hoth had now the burden to defend Echo Base alone although new pilots were already added to their roster, like Derek Klivian and Tycho Celchu.
During the Battle of Hoth, the Rogues had to add many "guest" members into their squadron.

The twelve snowspeeders of the Rogues gave the Rebels enough time to evacuate Echo Base and were destroyed later in the battle.
Before Return of the Jedi, one of Luke's last missions was the Battle of Gall against the Empire, in an attempt to capture the bounty hunters who had abducted Han Solo.
After Return of the Jedi, the squadron was hastily and temporarily reformed by Antilles with the best rebel pilots in order to defend the planet Bakura.
Rogue Squadron was now a lean team of six units: Antilles, Janson, Klivian, Celchu, Plourr Ilo and Dllr Nep.

One of the important missions during the New Republic's creation was the failed rescue mission of Sate Pestage, which bolstered the fame of New Republic.

Since Janson and Klivian moved on to train new pilots and squadrons, Antilles had to reinvent Rogue Squadron, now with pilots from a wide variety of planets, clearly for political reasons.
This "new" Rogue Squadron destroyed some of the Imperial forces led by Ysanne Isard and contributed heavily to the retaking of Coruscant.

After resigning from the Alliance military, the squadron fought in the Bacta War to retake the world of Thyferra from Isard.
During that time, Klivian led a temporary Rogue Squadron in the absence of the "true" Rogue Squadron.

Upon their return from Thyferra, Antilles turned command over to Tycho Celchu and founded Wraith Squadron.

Antilles commanded both squadrons against Warlord Zsinj and after that he returned to his command as Rogue Leader to battle against Thrawn, Krennel, Palpatine's clones and lead the team to other battles.

The squadron played a role in the Battle for Mon Calamari during Admiral Daala's campaign against the New Republic.

Around this time, former squadron leader Luke Skywalker was teaching his first class of Jedi Knights, including Rogue Squadron member Corran Horn.
The squadron was led by Tycho Celchu after the campaign against Krennel, and was then led by Gavin Darklighter during the Yuuzhan Vong War.

Later on during a brewing civil war within the Republic, the squadron would temporarily be led by Jaina Solo.
===
Notable pilots ===
The following characters are featured within the Legends non-canonical storyline, but have not appeared on the canon.
They are featured along the pilots featured on the canon.

====
Gavin Darklighter ====
Gavin Darklighter, Biggs' cousin, joined Rogue Squadron at 16 years old and quickly proved to be a more than capable pilot.
He became fast friends with Corran Horn, who helped him out of a situation where he was the "worst" pilot in the squadron.
Darklighter was wounded during the Imperial invasion of Talasea in the Morobe system.

During the Battle of Coruscant, Gavin became emotionally involved with Asyr
Sei'Lar, a Bothan who would later join Rogue Squadron.

Gavin was promoted to the rank of captain after the death of Grand Admiral Thrawn, and was promoted to Colonel and given command of Rogue Squadron at an unspecified date before the Yuuzhan Vong invasion.
Gavin would continue to move up the ranks during the Second Galactic Civil War and beyond, at one point leading the Galactic Alliance Marines.

====
Corran Horn ====
Corran Horn was invented by writer Michael Stackpole for the X-wing series.
Horn eventually became a major character in the Expanded Universe, starring in the novel
I, Jedi, as well as several New Jedi Order novels (in which he is a Jedi Knight, not a Rogue Squadron pilot).
Horn hails from Corellia, and originally worked as a security officer for CorSec before fleeing from the pursuit of Kirtan Loor, an Imperial intelligence officer.
Horn became an accomplished pilot, and remained with the Rogues for some time after discovering his Force-sensitive heritage.

He later trained to become a Jedi Knight after his wife was kidnapped in I, Jedi.

During the events of the Yuuzhan Vong War, Horn was promoted to Jedi Master and eventually went on to serve on the Jedi Council as one of the most powerful and prominent Jedi of his time.

He is also notable for carrying one of only a few "dual-phase" lightsabers known to exist.
The weapon was crafted by Horn during the time line of the I, Jedi novel based on designs given to him by Rostek Horn.
These were possibly the same plans that his great-grandfather, Keiran Halcyon, had created for his own dual-phase lightsaber.

====
Kasan Moor ====
Kasan Moor appears in Rogue Squadron, originally as a formidable opponent of the squadron.
She is a decorated Imperial TIE Interceptor pilot and leader of the famous 128th TIE Interceptor Squadron, but despite her record, like Tycho, her faith in the Imperial cause has been severely shaken after the Death Star's destruction of her homeworld of Alderaan.
She is recruited during the Liberation of Gerrard V, and when she joins, she becomes Rogue Squadron's lone female pilot during the game and a treasure trove of information on the Imperials.
Olivia Hussey provides her voice.

==
Cultural impact ==
Several games in the Final Fantasy series have a pair of minor characters named after Biggs and Wedge Antilles.

==
References ==
Footnotes
Citations


==
External links ==
Rogue Squadron on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Captain Cassian Jeron Andor is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise portrayed by Mexican actor Diego Luna in the 2016 film Rogue One.
He is a pilot, intelligence officer for the Rebel Alliance, and leader of Rogue One, a rebel unit which attempts to steal the plans to the Death Star, a weapon powerful enough to destroy a planet.

==
Character ==


=== Creation and development ===
Though not initially named Cassian Andor, a "Cassian Andor-type character" appeared in the original treatment of Rogue One written by John Knoll, chief creative officer at Industrial Light & Magic and in the first draft of the script written by Gary Whitta.
The character was created as a member of Rogue One, then commanded by a Rebel Alliance sergeant version of Jyn Erso.
The original intention was to kill all members of the Rogue One team, including Cassian.
However, fearing that Disney would not allow the ending, Knoll and Whitta wrote that Cassian escapes Scarif with the Death Star plans alongside Jyn Erso and, though their ship is destroyed by Darth Vader after they transfer the plans to Princess Leia, they narrowly survive in an escape pod.
Whitta stated that having to "jump through so many hoops" to ensure survival indicated that Cassian and Jyn should die on Scarif.
Producer Kathleen Kennedy and Disney ultimately approved the ending in which the entire crew dies.
The main purpose of this action was believed to be for the characters to be ultimately replaced after the film by the crew of the original trilogy.

===
Casting and portrayal ===
In May 2015, it was announced that Diego Luna had been cast in a lead role in Rogue One.
Director Gareth Edwards wanted Cassian to be warm and likeable rather than the typical stoic, brooding action hero, leading to Edwards' decision to cast Luna early in the casting process.
Diego Luna felt that his casting, and the casting of other non-white men in the film's leading roles, reflected a "modern approach" and a world in which "racial and cultural diversity is in fact making us richer and more interesting.
"Luna spoke in the role with his native Mexican accent, an exception for the film franchise, which has mostly featured American and British accents.
Luna stated that his accent was not an issue with the film's producers, who were happy with it.

==
Appearances ==


===
Rogue One ===
Rogue One:
A Star Wars Story was released in December 2016, featuring Luna in the role of Cassian Andor, a man who had been fighting in the Rebellion since he was six years old.
In the film, Cassian learns about the defection of Imperial pilot Bodhi Rook and the Death Star superweapon from rebel informant Tivik, whom he kills to avoid his capture since he is unable to escape due to an injured arm.
Cassian is later secretly ordered to find and assassinate scientist Galen Erso, who was captured by Director Orson Krennic and forced to help build the Death Star.

Andor and his co-pilot, reprogrammed Imperial security droid K-2SO, travel to Jedha with Galen's daughter Jyn Erso to obtain a message from Galen, carried by Rook.
Later, the rebels arrive on Eadu after learning that Galen is there; Cassian hesitantly chooses not to kill him.
He ultimately leads a team to steal the plans for the Death Star on Scarif, where he infiltrates its Imperial data center with Jyn and K-2SO.
After K-2SO sacrifices himself, Jyn and Cassian obtain the schematics, but they are ambushed by Krennic, who shoots Cassian.
However, Andor recovers and shoots and wounds
Krennic before Jyn successfully transmits the plans to the Rebel forces in orbit.
The Death Star then fires upon the base, killing Cassian and Jyn as they embrace.

====
Related works and merchandising ====
Cassian appears in the film novelization of Rogue One by Alexander Freed.

He also appears in Star Wars: Secrets of the Empire, a virtual reality experience produced by ILMxLAB and The VOID for the Disneyland Resort and Walt Disney World; Diego Luna reprises his role as Cassian to provide mission briefings and deliver orders throughout the experience.

===
Andor ===
Luna is set to reprise his role as Andor in a live-action "spy thriller" series for Disney+, which began production in November 2018 and was set to begin filming in June 2020, but the filming date was delayed due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
On August 7, 2020, Luna disclosed, "slowly we're going back, but there's no rush."
According to Luna, his character will appear younger in the series, which is set five years before Rogue One.
Genevieve O'Reilly will reprise her role as Mon Mothma, and the series is also set to feature Stellan Skarsgård, Denise Gough, Kyle Soller, and Adria Arjona.
Filming ultimately began in December 2020 in London, United Kingdom.

== Reception ==
Justin Chang of the Los Angeles Times praised Luna's "flinty charisma", but Ann Hornaday of The Washington Post wrote that "the fey, soft-spoken Luna is particularly ill-suited to play a rakish man of adventure".
Praising Felicity Jones in the role of Jyn Erso, Chris Nashawaty wrote in Entertainment Weekly, "I wish Luna had a little more personality, a little more Han Solo swagger, to match her."
==
References ==


==
External links ==
Cassian Andor in the StarWars.com Databank
Cassian Andor on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Cassian Andor on IMDb
Bodhi Rook is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise who first appeared in 2016 in Rogue One, portrayed by British Pakistani actor Riz Ahmed.
Bodhi is a former Imperial cargo pilot who, under the influence of Galen Erso, defects to the Rebel Alliance in an attempt to steal the plans to the Death Star.

==
Character ==


===
Origins ===
Industrial Light & Magic chief creative officer John Knoll, credited for the story of Rogue One, told Vanity Fair in 2016 that he conceived the plot of the film while working as a visual effects supervisor on the 2005 film Star Wars:
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith.
Hearing about the development of a live-action Star Wars television series, he conceived a story, inspired by a plot point mentioned in the opening crawl of the original 1977 film Star Wars, which would eventually become Rogue One.
At the beginning of shooting, Bodhi did not have a big role in the film, with Ahmed noting "He had a different name and a different relationship to the rest of the team, and he really evolved once I signed on
and once I started shooting, even.
"
Once shooting had begun, Bodhi was brought into the story much earlier and was made a more integral member of the team.
His first name, "Bodhi", is Sanskrit and Pāli for "enlightment" or "awaking".
===
Casting ===
Ahmed was reported to be in talks in April 2015 by The Wrap, his casting was later confirmed by Variety in May 2015.
Ahmed has said that director Gareth Edwards reached out to him for the role although it had not been fully developed yet, and Ahmed sent over 10 audition tapes in the hopes that at least one would satisfy the director, recounting in an interview with TIME magazine; "He [Edwards] made the mistake of giving me his email address because I just spammed him about 10-15 different versions of this thing—doing this obsessive thing that I do.
And he emailed me back at one point like, "Hey Riz, you don't need to keep emailing me your audition.
You're good.
We'll get back to you."
In this interview, Ahmed also revealed that he took inspiration from Dennis Hopper's performance in Apocalypse Now.

===
Description ===
Bodhi Rook was an Imperial cargo pilot working on an Imperial research facility on the planet Eadu, and under the influence of Galen, whom he describes as a "great man", Rook defects from the Empire and joins the Rebel Alliance with news of a "planet destroyer".
Rook is consistently doubting his abilities and reveals the only reason he defected was because Galen convinced him he was strong enough and brave enough.
Director Gareth Edwards has said that out of all the Rogue One characters, he relates to Bodhi the most.
Rook has strong piloting and technical skills, which helps the Rebels immensely.

==
Appearances ==


===
Rogue One ===
Rogue One:
A Star Wars Story was released in December 2016, featuring Riz Ahmed in the role of Bodhi.
In the film, he has just defected from the Empire after being given a holographic message of Galen Erso, father of lead character Jyn Erso.
Under Galen's orders, Rook travels to his home planet of Jedha to meet Saw Gerrera, leader of the Partisans, an extremist faction of the Rebel Alliance.
Rook smuggles the hologram of Galen to Gerrera, who tortures him to test his loyalty.
When Jedha City is destroyed by the superlaser from the Death Star, Bodhi is helped in his escape by Cassian Andor and the rest of the rebels.
He leads them to Eadu, where they find Galen and steal the Imperial cargo shuttle SW-0608.
Eventually, Bodhi participates in the final battle on Scarif, as part of a mission to steal the Death Star plans.
Rook's role in the battle is to stay on the stolen ship, as he is the Rebels' only chance of escape, after being told by Cassian that he must make contact with the Rebels to get back-up and destroy the shield surrounding the planet.
Rook compromises his position to do so and is killed when a shoretrooper throws a grenade into the ship, destroying it.

===
In other media ===
Rook appears in the film novelization of Rogue One by Alexander Freed.

Rook also appeared as a playable character in the mobile turn-based role-playing game
Star Wars: Galaxy of Heroes, available on iOS and Android, where he is classified as a support who works well with fellow Rebels, while slowing down enemies and making them easier to hit.

Rook is a playable Light Side squad leader in the mobile MOBA Star Wars:
Force Arena, also released on the same platforms.

He can deploy supply drops to assist allies, and is paired with a U-Wing as his unique assistant, which can be summoned to bomb one particular area of the field.

== Reception ==
Sam Adams of BBC stated that Bodhi's storyline was not handled well, saying "this part of the movie's a mess".
Eric Goldman of IGN wrote "There are a couple of cases though where it feels like a bit more backstory would have helped provide motivation – most notable, perhaps, with Bodhi, whose huge decision to betray the Empire, prior to the start of the film, doesn't feel fully fleshed out."
==
References ==


==
External links ==
Bodhi Rook in the StarWars.com Databank
Bodhi Rook on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Bodhi Rook on IMDb
The Guardians of the Whills are a faction in the fictional universe of the Star Wars franchise.
The Guardians are depicted as an organization of ascetics who revere the Force, a metaphysical concept in the Star Wars fictional universe, though unlike the Jedi or the Sith, they do not appear to wield overtly supernatural powers derived from their connection to the Force.

The term Whills originated from unused in-universe elements and story treatments by series creator George Lucas for the franchise's film series, most notably the Journal of the Whills, Part I (Lucas's earliest known draft for the first film).
Following the acquisition of Lucas' company Lucasfilm, Ltd. and the Star Wars intellectual property by The Walt Disney Company in 2012, the term is repurposed and reintroduced as the Guardians of the Whills, an esoteric monastic order who protect visiting pilgrims to a sacred temple located in the planet Jedha.
A blind Guardian named Chirrut Îmwe and his companion Baze Malbus appear as supporting characters in the 2016 film Rogue One: they aid members of the Rebel Alliance to steal plans of the Death Star, the ultimate weapon of the Galactic Empire.
Chirrut Îmwe and Baze Malbus are portrayed by Donnie Yen and Jiang Wen respectively.
Members of the monastic order have appeared in other Star Wars media, in particular the 2017 eponymous tie-in novel to Rogue One which featured appearances by Chirrut and Baze.

Both Chirrut and Baze have received a positive reception, and have since been recognized as fan favorites and influential characters in their own right.
==
Development ==
The Whills was originally a vague reference to an omnipresent yet distant order which was meant to be the narrative framing in an early draft of the Star Wars saga by George Lucas.
Lucas also came up with the Journal of the Whills as a concept of "Bible-like texts that inspire the stories chronicled in the Star Wars movies", essentially serving as a plot device which connects the fictional universe he created to the real world.
Before he sold the Star Wars media franchise to Disney, Lucas had considered developing a potential film trilogy of sequels to the original Trilogy where it would have explored a microbiotic world populated by creatures called Whills, which feed off the Force and are capable of using that connection to manipulate the universe.
Lucas thought of the franchise's Force-sensitive characters as "vehicles for the Whills to travel around in", with the conduit being the controversial midi-chlorian concept introduced in the prequel trilogy.
Since the Whills are the entities that communicate with the midi-chlorians, Lucas was of the opinion that "in a general sense, they are the Force.”
In the AMC series James Cameron’s Story of Science Fiction, Lucas revealed that he had considered this story treatment to be the proper conclusion to the narrative arc which commenced with the original trilogy and followed by the prequel trilogy, but cited the divisive reception of the prequel trilogy and acknowledged that it would have proven controversial with fans.
While the Whills were briefly mentioned in the prequel trilogy within series continuity, they are prominently referenced in Rogue One: A Star Wars Story.
Screenwriter Chris Weitz drew from Lucas' original ideas about the Whills to create the Guardians of the Whills faction, a religious order which is responsible for protecting an ancient Jedi temple on the planet Jedha prior to its sacking by Imperial forces.
According to lore presented in the Rogue One Visual Guide, as well as a quote from the Journal of the Whills which serves as an opening to the official novelization of The Force Awakens, the Guardians' teachings do not appear to emphasize a discord between the light and dark sides of the Force, and instead take a position of neutrality with a focus on encompassing the totality of its aspects as well as reverence for the "balance of the Force".
In a Rogue One "Watch From Home Theater" program hosted by IGN, Weitz noted that Lucas originally called the Force as "The Force of Others".
The term was frequently used by Chirrut Îmwe, a Guardian of the Whills who appears in the film as a representative character of the monastic organization, in early treatments of the film's script by Weitz.
Although the character is blind and unable to use the Force like the Jedi, he is devoted to the Force and could sense its presence..
Chirrut's skill in martial arts can rival that of a lightsaber-wielding Jedi; he is capable of defeating an entire squad of stormtroopers single-handedly, and even shoot down a TIE fighter using a specialized crossbow-shaped energy weapon called "lightbow".
Weitz noted that the Star Wars franchise has had a long history of presenting compelling dual pairings between characters whose outlooks and personalities are the opposites of each other.
Chirrut and his companion Baze Malbus, a former Guardian who left the organization prior to the events of Rogue One, were conceived during the initial design stage as a "dyad" who "don't belong together, but they do": the former "a believer in the Force" and the latter a "militaristic soldier".
To Weitz, Chirrut is Baze's confessor, which enables the latter to lay his own guilt onto Chirrut even though he is a faithless warrior who does not believe in the Force, and Chirrut could believe in his friend's eventual redemption.
The character designs for Chirrut and Baze went through numerous iterations during the development of the film, with up to 30 different variations.
The entirety of Chirrut's face except for his eyes was initially covered, and Baze was originally a four-armed alien before he is made human.
The attires for both Chirrut and Baze had a militaristic style, with a more armored and weaponized look.

Once Hong Kong actor Donnie Yen's casting as Chirrut was confirmed, the film's concept artists began looking to Yen's particular style and his body of martial arts films for inspiration, which led to the removal of armor and arnaments from Chirrut's design in favor of a sleeker look.
Yen was originally reluctant to accept the part as he did not want to be away from his family for an extended period of time, as he was required to relocate to the United Kingdom for five months of filming.
Yen accepted the role on his sons' urging, but insisted on having creative input in the character's development process as a condition of his acceptance.
Yen did not want his character to be stereotyped as "another Chinese kung fu master", and wanted Chirrut to have a sense of humour, as per his view that children need to think of the character as being "cool".
Yen proposed that the character be made blind, and did research on the exact blue shade of color he wanted for Chirrut's atrophied eyes.
Baze Malbus was named after Weitz's half-elven Dungeons & Dragons player character from his childhood years.
Designer David Crossman described Baze as a combination of several well-loved elements from fan favorite Star Wars characters, and that his visual design is driven by what they thought audiences would like to see in a mercenary character, highlighting in particular "the partial armor, the boiler suit, the cool gun, the backpack".
Baze's signature weapon, a heavy repeating blaster cannon, was designed by artists Jamie Wilkinson and Adam Brockbank early in the film development.
The red color theme on Baze's character design was eventually incorporated into Chirrut's vestments as a canonical religious aspect, which links both characters thematically.
Chinese actor Jiang Wen was originally uncertain about accepting the role, as he felt that his proficiency in English was lacking
and he had difficulty reading the script; he was assisted by his eldest son who could fluently read in English and interpret the script, and decided to travel to London after being encouraged by his children.

==
Appearances ==


===
Rogue One ===
Chirrut first appears on the streets of Jedha City preaching about the Force, where he encounters Jyn Erso and Cassian Andor.
After sensing that Jyn's necklace is made of Kyber crystal, the same material that power lightsabers, he asks her if she knew what they were.
He later comes to her aid after a plot to disguise herself and her companions were foiled by Imperial forces, as Jedha City is caught up in a conflict between Partisan insurgents led by Saw Gerrera, and Imperial forces who are looting the Guardians' Temple of the Kyber for Kyber crystals.
Using his highly honed senses to determine the positions of approaching Imperial troopers, as well as a timely assist by Baze Malbus, a mercenary who was once a Guardian
like he was, he defeated them in quick succession.
Chirrut, Baze, Jyn and Cassian are then abducted by Partisan forces and herded into confinement cells.
Along with Imperial defector Bodhi Rook, the group would eventually make their escape from the Partisan base aboard a U-Wing as Jedha City is attacked and destroyed by the Empire's new superweapon, the Death Star.

With the remnants of the temple the Guardians are sworn to protect obliterated, Chirrut and Baze remain with Jyn's group and accompany them to the Imperial world of Eadu in search for Jyn's father Galen, who originally designed the Death Star under duress.
Chirrut warns Jyn about Cassian's possible murderous intent towards Galen, as he had sensed the Force flowing darkly about him.
Chirrut and Baze help the Rebels to fight off Imperial forces, before departing on a stolen shuttle to Yavin IV.
After the Rebel Alliance declines Jyn's request to send a fleet to the world of Scarif, Chirrut and Baze join her mission to break into the Imperial archives to secure the plans for the Death Star, and are put in charge of an assault team that would set charges to lure out Imperial Stormtroopers.
Both Chirrut and Baze subsequently hold the line in order to extend time for their allies to complete their tasks; Chirrut dies from an errant explosion after he flips a switch which broadcasts the plans to the Rebels via a signal, while Baze sacrifices himself to help deactivate the planetary deflector shield which blocks the signal.

===
In other media ===
Chirrut and Baze appear as the main characters of the 2017 prequel tie-in novel to Rogue One, Star Wars: Guardians of the Whills, which explores their backstories  as well as their past interactions with Saw Gerrera.
A manga adaptation of the novel by Viz Media is set for release on May 4, 2021.Several Guardians appear in a flashback retelling by recurring Star Wars Rebels character Hondo Ohnaka in the 2019 tie-in comic book miniseries to the theme park attraction Star Wars: Galaxy's Edge.
Set prior to the events of Rogue One, the Guardians intercept him and his client in a "sacred tunnel" passageway and attempt to stop them from trespassing into the Temple of the Kyber.

== Reception ==
Chirrut and Baze, the two most prominent representatives of the faction within series continuity, have received a positive reception from professional reviewers and are recognized as fan favorite characters by Star Wars fans.
Chirrut in particular was singled out for praise as having the best quotable dialogue in Rogue One.
In a viewer's choice poll on the official Star Wars website, Chirrut is ranked as the top Rogue One character with 24% of the vote.
Julian Medranda from The Highlander said Chirrut and Baze were the characters he found the most compelling; he compared their chemistry to Han Solo and Chewbacca, and found almost every interaction involving them to be enjoyable even though they were essentially minor characters whose  interesting scenes were often interrupted by "boring" action set pieces or lengthy exposition scenes.
Medranda suggested that while the casting of Yen and Jiang could be interpreted as a marketing ploy to appeal to Chinese audiences, their inclusion packed charm which the main cast supposedly lacked.
In her review of the Guardians of the Whills novel, Amy Ratcliffe from Nerdist appreciated the duo's grounded characterization - Chirrut's sense of hope and Baze's inner conflict - and the fact that they accept that they are not fully in control of their situation following the Empire's disruption of their lives.
Ratcliffe praised their devotion, persistence, friendship and their willingness to fight for the innocent people of Jedha.
In an article written for Screenrant where he commented on the Guardians' appearance in Galaxy's Edge, Andrew Dyce expressed hope that the order as a whole have managed to survive the Imperial invasion and replenish their numbers, and that Guardian characters would continue to appear in future Star Wars stories.
Similarly, Jesse Schedeen from IGN was hopeful that Disney would revisit "the glory days of Jedha and the Guardians of the Whills" via a television series set before Rogue One.
Leon Hurley from Gamesradar wanted to see a spin-off movie featuring either Chirrut and Baze in the style of a buddy film, or a narrative that is centered on the Guardians of the Whills as a whole.
Chirrut and Baze appeared as a popular pairing in several "shipping" related posts and opinion pieces by critics and fans, particularly during December 2016 which was the month Rogue One was released.

===
In popular culture ===
In September 2017, the animated web series How It Should Have Ended ("HISHE") released a brickfilm parody video made using stop motion filmmaking techniques which greatly exaggerates Chirrut's combat prowess.

Artist Dan Mumford created a poster depicting Chirrut and Baze titled "I Am One With The Force, The Force Is With Me", which references Chirrut's mantra.

In an interview with Malaysian publication The Star, author Zen Cho credited the "odd couple" dynamic between Chirrut and Baze as an inspiration for her 2020 wuxia fiction novel, The Order Of The Pure Moon Reflected In Water.

==
References ==
Catalyst:
A Rogue One Novel is a science-fiction novel written by James Luceno that was published on November 15, 2016.
It is set in the Star Wars universe and takes place in the time period from the Clone Wars to a couple years after Revenge of the Sith, serving as a prelude to the 2016 Star Wars  anthology film Rogue One.
It relates the story of the Galactic Republic's and later the Galactic Empire's project to develop its superweapon, the Death Star.
The novel serves to create a backstory both to Rogue One and to A New Hope from 1977.Catalyst was announced in July 2016 at the Star Wars Celebration Europe event in London during a Star Wars Publishing panel session.

==
Plot ==
During the Clone Wars, the Galactic Republic begins working on a moon-sized battle station based on a Separatist design, hoping to complete its construction before the Separatists potentially finish their own station.
However, the Republic finds that building the primary weapon of the station will entail a breakthrough in energy enhancement.
Lieutenant Commander Orson Krennic offers to recruit one of the finest scientists in the galaxy, an energy scientist named Galen Erso, to provide the breakthrough.
Krennic has a personal connection with Erso, becoming friends while studying at the same university.

Meanwhile, Erso, a neutralist, is working on the planet Vallt doing energy research for Zerpen Industries, when the planetary government is overthrown in a coup sympathetic to the Separatists.
Erso is imprisoned in a bid to force his loyalty to the Separatists.
His pregnant wife Lyra is also imprisoned and gives birth to a daughter, Jyn.

Galen, Lyra and Jyn are rescued by Krennic, masquerading as a Zerpen representative, making an exchange for the Ersos.
Safely off-planet, Krennic reveals he is working for the Republic, and a Republic battleship destroys the government complex of Vallt while Krennic and the Ersos watch.
On Coruscant, Krennic and other members of the military work to subtly persuade Galen to join the battle station project under construction in orbit around the planet of Geonosis.

Krennic finds a non-research position for Galen at Helical HyperCom on the planet Lokori.
Galen and his family move to Lokori, which comes under regular Separatist attack.
At the end of a major offensive which has very nearly conquered Lokori, the attack is suspended.
It is learned that the Clone Wars are over, the Republic has become an Empire, the Separatist leadership was killed and the Jedi Order destroyed.
The Ersos move back to Coruscant, where Krennic has set up the Project Celestial Power project for Galen to continue his energy research with kyber crystals, ostensibly to provide power sources to Empire worlds, but secretly a cover project for the weapon construction of the battle station, which continues to be constructed, despite the war being over.

Krennic hires Obitt and his smugglers to drop decommissioned weapons to the planets Samovar and Wadi Raffa.
The weapon drops are a ruse for the Empire to enter on the pretext of suspected anarchist activity.
Once the weapons are found, the Empire uses the circumstances to set up occupying forces on the planets, taking over mining corporations on the worlds.
The pretext gives the Empire the chance to exploit the two worlds' resources, overriding the environmental protections in force on the two "Legacy" worlds.

Unknown to Galen, Krennic has set up a satellite facility on the planet Malpaz where Erso's former colleague Dagio Belcoze is attempting to test the energy output.
The experiments on Malpaz blow up and kill ten thousand on the planet.
The damage is attributed to anarchist elements opposing the Empire.
Krennic becomes suspicious of Lyra's intentions and influence over Galen and arranges for her to lead a survey team of the planet Alpinn looking for kyberite and the possibility of kyber crystals.
After the survey is over, Obitt shows Lyra and Nari the planets of Samovar and Wadi Raffa, protected planets mostly destroyed by Empire mining for the battle station project.

Lyra returns to Coruscant to find Galen absorbed in his research, and the Celestial project now under tight security.
Galen was developing serious suspicions about the use of his energy research, but chose not to discuss it with Lyra without stronger proof.
Galen continued to make breakthroughs with a boulder-size kyber, learning how to use its properties to amplify energy beams.
His work led to a breakthrough and Krennic arranged to have a Star Destroyer set up with a twin laser array, which was tested successfully in deep space.

Meanwhile, Krennic had set up another smuggling mission for Obitt to the Salient system.
In secret, Obitt has arranged with Saw Gerrera to warn the Salient system of the Empire's intentions, letting them prepare for an Empire invasion.
After the drop, Tarkin brings a Star Destroyer to demand access to Salient, as was done on Samovar and Wadi Raffa.
This time, the system starts fighting with the Empire, and destroying any facilities that the Empire can use.
Tarkin's forces are tied down in battle, and he suspects that Krennic has allowed Obitt to warn the Salient system, likely as an attempt to further his career over Tarkin's.

Krennic's research team, who are unaware of the true purpose of their energy research and questions Krennic, demands to be released from the program.
Krennic promises them full releases from their contracts, but instead kills them all, destroying their facility on Hypori with turbolaser blasts from his Star Destroyer.
He returns to Coruscant, where he finds more evidence of suspicious behaviour by Galen and Lyra.
He threatens Lyra with prosecution, which only leads to Lyra forcing a talk with Galen in secret, where they both reveal their suspicions about the project.

Tarkin is finally successful in subjugating the Salient system and captures Obitt.
Obitt was severely injured in the battle, but wakes up on Tarkin's Destroyer fully healed.
Under interrogation by Tarkin, Obitt reveals all of his recent activity with the Ersos and Krennic.
Tarkin decides to use Obitt to strike back at Krennic.

On Coruscant, Krennic is confronted by the Ersos.
Krennic leaves them, worried about their intentions when he learns that Obitt's ship has been tracked coming to Coruscant.
Krennic believes that Obitt may be helping the Ersos to escape and orders the project security to hold them, but it is too late.
Krennic arrives at the spaceport to confront Obitt and prevent the Ersos escape.
However, Obitt has arranged for Gerrera to arrive in another ship and the Ersos leave Coruscant.

Obitt continues to work for Tarkin, reporting on Krennic's activities, while also looking for the Ersos for Krennic.
Tarkin is assigned to the bases of the battle station construction to supervise security, plotting to take control of the battle station project, while Krennic is demoted for losing Galen Erso.
The Ersos, meanwhile have escaped with Gerrera to the planet
Lah'mu.

==
Characters ==
Galen Erso – A scientist involved in energy crystal and energy enrichment research, and an old friend of Lt.
Commander Krennic.

Lyra Erso –
The wife of Galen, and the mother of Jyn.

Lieutenant Commander Orson Krennic – Commander in the Republic Corps of Engineers, Special Weapons Group.

Commander Wilhuff Tarkin – Adjutant General for the Republic Navy.

Captain Has Obitt – Dressellian smuggler
Saw Gerrera – Smuggler and former soldier.

Archduke Poggle
the Lesser – Leader of the planet of Geonosis.

Jyn Erso – The daughter of Galen and Lyra.

Vice Chancellor Mas Amedda – Vizier to Emperor Palpatine and overseer of the battle station's construction


==
Reception ==
Den of Geek's Megan Crouse gave Catalyst a 3.5/5 rating.
Nerdist's Amy Ratcliff described Catalyst as an exciting read but not without its flaws.
Jim Lehane of the website Adventures
In Poor Taste stated Catalyst was insightful but only half the story.
Books-a-Million rated the novel 4.8/5.
==
Publication ==
Catalyst was released in hardback and electronic versions on November 15, 2016.
A mass market edition was released on May 2, 2017, the same day Disney Lucasfilm Press released Star Wars: Rebel Rising, which follows the events of Catalyst.

==
Sequels ==
The conclusion of Catalyst leads into the first events of the Rogue One: A Star Wars Story novel, released in December 2016.
Jyn Erso's story during the period from the prologue of Rogue One to later events in that film and novel are told in the novel Star Wars:
Rebel Rising, released in hardcover in 2017.
==
References ==


==
External links ==
Catalyst on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Listing on Penguin Random House
Jyn Erso is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise, portrayed by English actress Felicity Jones in the 2016 film Rogue One.
Jyn aids the Rebel Alliance in a desperate attempt to steal the plans to the Death Star, a powerful weapon possessed by the Empire with enough power to destroy an entire planet.
The character was introduced as a child in the 2016 prequel novel Catalyst by James Luceno.

==
Character ==


===
Origins ===
Industrial Light & Magic chief creative officer John Knoll, credited for the story of Rogue One, told Vanity Fair in 2016 that he conceived the plot of the film while working as a visual effects supervisor on the 2005 film Star Wars:
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith.
Hearing about the development of a live-action Star Wars television series, he conceived a story, inspired by a plot point mentioned in the opening crawl of the original 1977 film Star Wars, which would eventually become Rogue One.
Knoll envisioned Jyn as a female protagonist who could be an inspiration for his daughters.
The casting of Felicity Jones in the role of Jyn was announced on March 12, 2015.

===
Portrayal ===
In January 2015, The Hollywood Reporter stated that numerous actresses, including Tatiana Maslany, Rooney Mara, and Felicity Jones were being tested for the lead role in Rogue One, the first stand-alone Star Wars film.
In February 2015, it was reported that Jones was in final talks to star in the film, and her official casting was announced in March 2015.

=== Description ===
Jyn is the daughter of Galen Erso, a scientist forced by the Empire to develop their Death Star superweapon.
Young Jyn escapes when Galen is captured and his wife Lyra is killed by Imperial forces.
She grows up under the watch of "extremist militant" Saw Gerrera, who also mentors and trains her in military combat.
IGN's Eric Goldman wrote that she has "put up a brash, stern wall to protect herself, thanks to a traumatic childhood".
Chris Barsanti of PopMatters added that Jyn's childhood tragedy leaves her "just cynical and bereft enough to make her hold out a respectable length of time before agreeing to assist the Rebel Alliance".
Writing for Vanity Fair, Hilary Busis suggested that with Jyn's backstory, the film was drawing on "the Star Wars franchise's greatest natural resource: daddy issues".
The Daily Telegraph described Jyn as "a roguish, Han Solo-style heroine", and Todd McCarthy of The Hollywood Reporter called the character "a female warrior driven by destiny to take on the mightiest power in the galaxy".
Chris Nashawaty of Entertainment Weekly described Jyn as a "fierce fighter" and "rallying leader".
A. O. Scott wrote in The New York Times that in Rogue One, "Jyn's idealistic Jedi-ish tendencies are at first checked by a hint of Bogart-esque cynicism.
She's suspicious of the rebels and contemptuous of the Empire, and has complicated feelings about Saw Gerrera".
Peter Travers of Rolling Stone called Jyn "a born rebel", and Richard Brody of The New Yorker noted that "though Jyn had never exhibited any spirit of revolt", coming together with Gerrera and the rebels results in "Jyn's transition from an apolitical survivor to an active rebel".

== Appearances ==


===
Novels ===
Jyn is introduced as a child in the prequel novel Catalyst: A Rogue One Novel by James Luceno, published in November 2016.
In the novel, Republic Lieutenant Commander Orson Krennic saves his old friend Galen Erso and his family from a coup, and enlists the scientist to develop energy technology using kyber crystals that would ostensibly be applied to altruistic purposes.
The research is actually necessary for the successful construction of Emperor Palpatine's secret superweapon, the Death Star.
Galen and his wife Lyra begin to suspect Krennic's ulterior motives, and plot to free themselves and their daughter Jyn from his grasp.
Jyn appears as the main character in the novel Rebel Rising by Beth Revis.
This novel takes place between the prologue and main narrative of Rogue One.

She also appears in the novelization of Rogue One by Alexander Freed.
Saw Gerrera appears with an eleven-year-old Jyn Erso in the novelization of the film Solo:
A Star Wars Story.

===
Film ===


====
Rogue One ====
Rogue One was released in December 2016, with Felicity Jones in the role of Jyn.
In the film, scientist Galen Erso (Mads Mikkelsen) is pressed into the service of the Empire against his will.
When he is captured and his wife Lyra (Valene Kane) is killed, their young daughter Jyn escapes and hides in the bunker.
She is later rescued by a Rebel extremist named Saw Gerrera (Forest Whitaker) who cared for her after Galen's capture.

Fifteen years later, Jyn is being held in Imperial custody on several criminal charges, but the Rebel Alliance frees her during a prisoner transport on the planet Wobani.
They seek her help in contacting Saw Gerrera and persuading him to turn over information he has received about a powerful new weapon being developed by the Empire.
Accompanied by Rebel intelligence operative Cassian Andor (Diego Luna) and the reprogrammed Imperial enforcer droid K-2SO (Alan Tudyk), Jyn travels to the desert moon Jedha and reconnects with Saw, who shows her a holographic message that Galen recorded for her.
Galen explains that he has secretly given the Imperial superweapon, called the Death Star, a fatal flaw that can be exploited to destroy it.
Jyn and her comrades, joined by the defecting Imperial pilot who brought the message, Bodhi Rook (Riz Ahmed), and a pair of local warriors, flee as the Empire's Death Star, an armored battle station the size of a small moon, destroys Jedha City.

They track Galen to his research facility on Eadu, where he and Jyn are briefly reunited just before he dies in a Rebel attack.
Galvanized
, Jyn proposes a mission to steal the schematics for the Death Star, stored on the planet Scarif, but the council of Rebel leaders does not support it.
Nevertheless, Jyn and a team of Rebel volunteers sneak away under the callsign "Rogue One" to infiltrate the Imperial facility on Scarif.
She and Andor succeed in stealing and transmitting the plans, but the Death Star fires on the planet near the base in a too-late effort to stop them.
Jyn and Cassian embrace each other as they are engulfed by a fireball and killed.

Chris Barsanti of PopMatters noted that "Jyn's backstory also helps answer a question that's plagued fans ever since 1977: why did the Empire spend all that time and all those resources building a moon-sized space station only to leave one rather glaring and easily exploited vulnerability?"
IndieWire's David Ehrlich suggested that the film "is ultimately just a glorified excuse to retcon some sense into one of the silliest things about the original."
===
Animated series ===


====
Forces of Destiny ====
Jyn is also featured in Star Wars Forces of Destiny, an animated web series focusing on female heroes including Princess Leia and Ahsoka Tano.
In the episode "The Stranger", Jyn witnesses a little girl's cat being confiscated by stormtroopers.
Jyn intervenes, snatching the pet and leading the pursuing stormtroopers to fall into drain, and then returns the cat to the girl.

Jyn reappears in the series in the episode, "Accidental Allies," where she encounters Sabine Wren from Star Wars Rebels.

During the episode, Jyn picks up a holo-map stolen by Sabine that contains crucial intelligence, but is forced to flee when stormtroopers mistake Jyn as the actual thief.

When Sabine realizes she has lost the map, she helps Jyn evade the stormtroopers and shares her own experience of working alone to persuade Jyn to give her the map.

After some reflection, Jyn agrees and the women part ways.
Jyn reappears once more in the episode "Jyn's Trade", where she helps a young thief learn a valuable life lesson.
She was voiced by Felicity Jones in the first season and Helen Sadler in the second season.

===
Related works and merchandising ===
Jyn is a playable character in the 2015 action shooter video game Star Wars Battlefront, as part of the 2016 downloadable content (DLC) Rogue One:
Scarif expansion pack.
She is voiced by Helen Sadler.
Jyn also appears as a character in the strategy video game
Star Wars: Force Arena.

== Reception ==
A. O. Scott of The New York Times wrote, "Felicity Jones is a fine addition to the Star Wars tradition of tough-minded, quick-thinking heroines."
Peter Bradshaw of The Guardian noted that "Jones is in the tousled-yet-game tradition of Star Wars female leads, like Carrie Fisher or Daisy Ridley: well-born but determined, with a sense of purpose befitting an heiress, if not a princess."
Peter Travers of Rolling Stone called Jones "smashing" and her Jyn "a female warrior to rank with the great ones", and Justin Chang of the Los Angeles Times praised Jones for her "sympathetic ferocity" in the role.
IndieWire's David Ehrlich compared Jyn to Rey (Ridley) from The Force Awakens, and described her as "indistinguishable from the bland and plucky heroine of Episode VII save for her
privileged disillusionment".
Chris Nashawaty of Entertainment Weekly called Jyn "the kind role model
any moviegoing parent would want to expose their daughters (and sons) to", adding that "Jones plays her with a fiery warmth that turns her into more than just a pawn piece going through the larger storytelling paces.
She makes her human."
Ann Hornaday of The Washington Post wrote that "Jones presents a convincing, if monotonously self-serious, heroine", noting the actress' physical resemblance to Ridley and speculating that their characters could be related.
The Hollywood Reporter's Graeme McMillan criticized the character for her passive role in the film's plot, calling her "a void where the movie's heart should live".
McMillan speculated that the character was a possible "casualty" of Rogue One's reshoots.

== Notes ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Jyn Erso in the StarWars.com Databank
Jyn Erso on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Jyn Erso on IMDb
Saw Gerrera is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise.
Saw was originally introduced as a minor character in the animated series Star Wars:
The Clone Wars, where he was voiced by Andrew Kishino.
He was subsequently played by Forest Whitaker in the film Rogue One:
A Star Wars Story, who also voiced the character in the animated series Star Wars Rebels and the video game Star Wars Jedi:
Fallen Order.

In The Clone Wars, he is the brother of the leader of the Onderon rebels, Steela Gerrera, with whom he helps free Onderon from the Confederacy of Independent Systems, and is mentored in military combat by the Jedi Obi-Wan Kenobi and Anakin Skywalker (along with his Padawan Ahsoka Tano) and clone trooper Captain Rex.
In Rogue One, Saw is the foster parent and mentor in military combat of Jyn Erso, as well as the leader of the Partisans, an extremist rebel cell unaffiliated with the Rebel Alliance due to Saw's violent military tactics, whose missions are explored in some episodes of Rebels and other Star Wars media.

==
Concept and creation ==
Though Saw appeared in animated form in The Clone Wars, that was not the original plan for him.
Appearing on The Star Wars Show, Pablo Hidalgo of Lucasfilm’s Story Group revealed the character’s origin; "He started off before that.
George Lucas had him in mind for his live-action TV series that was in development, which ultimately never happened, but he found a place to put Saw into a story in Clone Wars.
"Supervising
director of The Clone Wars Dave Filoni stated: "We wanted a brother/sister duo on Onderon, and the character Saw was a character that George had already created, and he just wanted to involve and tell a little more about that character.
So in the course of that we created Steela [to be Saw's sister], who would act as a natural foil to Ahsoka.
"Andrew
Kishino, who voiced Saw in The Clone Wars, said that the character "[H]as even sort of, embodied in him, that feisty spirit of the Rebellion.
The take-no-garbage kind of individual.
He's stoic and strong and brash.
He's 'that' guy, and it's that kind of strength tempered with Steela's calm, level-headed thinking, that is, to stand up to something that will ultimately become the Empire, absolutely critical and necessary.
Saw Gerrera's name is a "mnemonic riff" on the Argentinian revolutionary Che Guevara.
Gerrera is also a heterograph of the Spanish word "guerrera", meaning "female warrior", describing Steela.

Entertainment Weekly revealed the character's appearance in Rogue One on June 22, 2016.
The film's director, Gareth Edwards, had wanted a character to showcase the more "militant" and "extreme" side of the rebellion.
Co-producer Kiri Hart suggested using Gerrera, a pre-established character, in this role.
Gerrera appears significantly older in Rogue One than he did in The Clone Wars, despite the two works taking place only roughly twenty years apart.

==
Appearances ==


===
Films and animated series ===


====
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars ====
Saw Gerrera (voiced by Andrew Kishino) first appeared in the fifth season of Star Wars:
The Clone Wars, in the "Onderon arc" consisting of the episodes "A War on Two Fronts", "Front Runners", "The Soft War", and "Tipping Point".
The character appears on all the episodes of the arc, along with his sister, Steela Gerrera, the leader of the Onderon rebels.
The Jedi Knights Obi-Wan Kenobi and Anakin Skywalker (and his Padawan Ahsoka Tano), along with clone trooper Captain Rex, secretly train Saw and the other members of the resistance movement in military combat but refuse to get involved in the conflict, and leave Ahsoka to supervise the operation with instructions to not fight the battle for them.

Saw attempts to rescue the deposed King Ramsis Dendup from execution, only to be captured and tortured.
However, he plays a vital part in the Onderon rebellion by convincing Dendup and militia General Tandin that the rebels are fighting out of loyalty to their rightful sovereign.
Eventually, Saw and Steela lead the Onderon resistance to victory over the Confederacy of Independent Systems, though not without paying a heavy price for it when Steela dies saving the king.
Dave Filoni, along with the writers, decided for the arc to end with the death of Steela, because in his words, he wanted to depict that "there had to be a price paid for their freedom".

====
Star Wars Rebels ====
Saw is mentioned in the Star Wars Rebels second-season episode "The Honorable Ones", as being a factor in Agent Kallus's disdain for the rebellion's tactics against the Empire and part of the reason he participated in the genocide of the Lasat race of Ghost crew member Garazeb "Zeb" Orrelios.

Saw makes an appearance in the third season, two-part episode "Ghost of Geonosis", with Forest Whitaker reprising his role from Rogue One in vocal capacity.
In the episode, after the Rebellion loses contact with Saw and his squad investigating Geonosis, they decide to send the Ghost crew (including Jedi Knight Kanan Jarrus, his Padawan Ezra Bridger, and Captain Rex) to rescue him.
Given the continuity error of Saw having a different eye colour in Rogue One to his appearance in The Clone Wars, a mixture of the two was used to imply Gerrera's eye colour to be changing with age.
Saw later appears in the fourth season's two-part episode "In the Name of the Rebellion", which is set shortly before the events of Rogue One.
He rescues Ezra and Sabine Wren during their mission to assist him in learning about the Empire's super weapon, which he was investigating since Geonosis.
Though learning it is powered by Kyber Crystals, Saw reached a dead end.

====
Rogue One:
A Star Wars Story ====
Gerrera reappears in Rogue One: A Star Wars Story, portrayed by Forest Whitaker.
Within the film, Gerrera leads the Partisans, an extremist rebel faction unaffiliated with the Rebel Alliance, on the planet Jedha.
He plays on the frequent theme of duality between light and dark, a Rebel foil of Darth Vader whose body is mostly mechanized and who uses extreme methods in the pursuit of his goals.
He is Jyn Erso's mentor, having rescued her as a child when her father Galen was abducted by Orson Krennic, the Imperial military director of weapons research.
Gerrera has a reunion with Jyn on Jedha, where he passes along a message from Galen indicating a weakness in the Death Star.
Meanwhile, the Death Star fires on Jedha City; while Jyn and her rebel companions escape, Gerrera chooses to stay and is killed when his hideout is annihilated in the wake of the blast.
Krennic later boasts to Galen that Gerrera and his band of fanatics are dead.

===
Novels ===
Saw appears in the novelization adaptation of the film Rogue One by Alexander Freed.
Saw Gerrera appears along a seven-year-old Jyn Erso, in the novelization of the film Solo: A Star Wars Story, the short appearance reveals that Enfys Nest was working stealing the fuel for Saw.

====
Star Wars: Bloodline ====
The character is mentioned in the novel Star Wars:
Bloodline, set six years before the events of Star Wars:
The Force Awakens, where it is noted that his methods of combating the Empire are viewed as having been "extreme".
====
Catalyst:
A
Rogue One Novel ====
Gerrera appears in Catalyst: A Rogue One Novel, detailing how he came to meet Galen, Lyra and Jyn Erso.

====
Rebel Rising ====
Gerrera appears in the novel Rebel Rising by Beth Revis.
The novel's timeline takes place between Catalyst:
A Rogue One Novel and the beginning of Rogue One.
===
Video games ===


====
Star Wars Jedi:
Fallen Order ====
Gerrera appears in Star Wars Jedi:
Fallen Order (2019), again voiced by Forest Whitaker.
Despite the game taking place only five years after The Clone Wars, Gerrera is significantly older, closely resembling his Star Wars Rebels self.
He is first seen on Kashyyyk alongside his Partisans attempting to liberate the Wookiees from Imperial occupation.
During his quest to find the Wookiee chieftain Tarfull, Cal Kestis encounters Gerrera and his men, who ask for his help in freeing the Wookiees in exchange for tracking down Tarfull.
Gerrera's men eventually find Tarfull, but are overwhelmed by Imperial forces and retreat.
By the time Cal returns to Kashyyyk to meet with Tarfull, Gerrera has left the planet, though some of his Partisans stayed behind to continue assisting the Wookiees.
==
References ==


==
External links ==
Saw Gerrera in the StarWars.com Databank
Saw Gerrera on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Saw Gerrera on IMDb
Director Orson Callan Krennic is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise, portrayed by Australian actor Ben Mendelsohn in the 2016 film Rogue One as the main antagonist.
Krennic is the Director of Advanced Weapons Research for the Galactic Empire.
The character was introduced in the 2016 prequel novel Catalyst by James Luceno.

==
Character ==


===
Origins ===
Industrial Light & Magic chief creative officer John Knoll, credited for the story of Rogue One, told Vanity Fair in 2016 that he conceived the plot of the film while working as a visual effects supervisor on the 2005 film Star Wars:
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith.
Hearing about the development of a live-action Star Wars television series, he conceived a story, inspired by a plot point mentioned in the opening crawl of the original 1977 film Star Wars, which would eventually become Rogue One.
In Knoll's original story draft of the film, Krennic was a double agent on Jyn Erso's team reporting to the Imperial Security Bureau, however this was changed when Gary Whitta came aboard to write the script.
Earlier planned endings for the film featured Krennic surviving the events on Scarif before being killed by Darth Vader for not preventing the theft of the plans to the Death Star.
The scene was cut as writers had trouble justifying why Krennic would have survived the explosion the Death Star caused.

===
Casting ===
In March 2015, it was announced that Ben Mendelsohn had been cast in a lead role in Rogue One.
Mendelsohn said in an interview he learned about his casting while filming Bloodline, having dinner in a restaurant with director Gareth Edwards, "He [Edwards] told me about the story and he told me about the character and then he said, 'I want you to do it.'"
Mendelsohn noted his response was immediate.

===
Description ===
In an interview with Collider, Mendelsohn spoke of his character, saying "He's an outsider, essentially.
He's an outsider in so far as he's not a born officer class guy, he's a guy that worked his way up and regards a lot of the officer class as just not really worth their salt."
Mendelsohn also noted "He is a guy that as it were has come up through stuff, so he has a great force of will, he also very much believes in the empire’s agenda, he's very onboard with it.
He's risen his way up to become the head of military intelligence and operations
and he's going to build this Death Star."

==
Appearances ==


===
Catalyst ===
Krennic first appears in the 2016 prequel novel Catalyst: A Rogue One Novel by James Luceno.
A Lieutenant Commander in the Republic Special Weapons group, he rescues his old friend Galen Erso, a scientist who has been kidnapped with his family by Separatist agents.
Following the formation of the Empire, Krennic manipulates Galen to work on the Death Star project.
The novel also explains how Krennic's interrogation of Poggle the Lesser, a character introduced in Attack of the Clones, kickstarted the Empire's Death Star Project.

===
Rogue One ===
Rogue One:
A Star Wars Story was released in December 2016, featuring Ben Mendelsohn in the role of Orson Krennic, the Imperial weapons developer overseeing the construction of the Death Star, a space station with the capability to destroy an entire planet.
In the beginning of the film, he captures Galen Erso to force him to continue helping the Empire build the superweapon.
Over a decade later, Krennic meets with Grand Moff Tarkin, who expresses skepticism about his management of the Death Star project.
When the Death Star is completed, Krennic tests its superlaser on the capital city of Jedha.
Once he has proven the station's power, the imperious Tarkin uses a recent security leak as a pretext to wrest control of the weapon away from Krennic.
A furious Krennic travels to Eadu to confront Galen and his team of scientists, whom he believes may be responsible for the leak.
After Galen confesses, he is mortally wounded during a Rebel attack and Krennic flees.
He later meets with Darth Vader on Mustafar, seeking an audience with Palpatine, but is dismissed to ensure there are no further security breaches related to the Death Star project.
Krennic goes to Scarif as the Rebels engage Imperial forces there, and sends his death trooper guards into battle while he attempts to stop the Rebels from stealing the Death Star plans hidden in the Scarif Imperial facility.
Krennic shoots and wounds Cassian Andor, and later tries to kill Jyn Erso, but Andor recovers and shoots Krennic, incapacitating him.
Krennic is killed when the Death Star fires on and destroys the Imperial base on the orders of Tarkin.

===
Related works and merchandising ===
Krennic appears in the film novelization of Rogue One by Alexander Freed.
Krennic is a playable character in the 2015 action shooter video game Star Wars Battlefront, as part of the 2016 downloadable content (DLC) Rogue One:
Scarif expansion pack.

He also appears as a playable character in the mobile turn-based role-playing game
Star Wars: Galaxy of Heroes, classified as an Empire support who inflicts various debuffs and works well with a death trooper.

He is also a Dark Side squad leader in the 2017 MOBA Star Wars: Force Arena who provides a small energy boost and also possesses a rapid-fire attack ability.

Krennic is mentioned a few times in the final season of Star Wars Rebels, but did not appear in the series due to a creative decision by Dave Filoni.
He was written into one of the earlier drafts of the episode "A Fool's Hope", but the scene was cut early on.
Star Wars: Darth Vader Annual #2 features an appearance by Krennic which depicts his first encounter with Vader and his feud with Tarkin.
Krennic appears in Timothy Zahn's 2019 novel Star Wars: Thrawn: Treason.
Set against the backdrop of the last episodes of Star Wars Rebels, the novel includes an encounter between Krennic and Grand Admiral Thrawn.

== Reception ==
In Sight & Sound's otherwise critical review of the film, Tim Hayes wrote, "Apart from Ben Mendelsohn's weaselly Orson Krennic ... and perhaps Donnie Yen as a blind samurai ...
the faces are unmemorable and the characters
unexceptional".
Joshua Starnes wrote that Krennic's failures against the Rebels and pursuit of praise do not make him "a particularly sinister or effective villain", and the film "continually weakens him as a threatening presence".

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Director Orson Krennic in the StarWars.com Databank
Orson Krennic on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Star Wars: Lords of the Sith is a Star Wars novel by Paul S. Kemp, published in April 2015.
Set between the film Revenge of the Sith and the novel
Star Wars:
Tarkin, it features Darth Vader and Emperor Palpatine facing off against revolutionaries.
Lords of the Sith was one of the first four novels published in the franchise after Lucasfilm redefined Star Wars continuity in April 2014.

==
Overview ==
In Lords of the Sith, Vader and Palpatine find themselves hunted by revolutionaries on the Twi'lek planet Ryloth.

==
Publication ==
With the 2012 acquisition of Lucasfilm by The Walt Disney Company, most of the licensed Star Wars novels and comics produced since the originating 1977 film Star Wars were rebranded as Star Wars Legends and declared non-canon to the franchise in April 2014.
Lords of the Sith was subsequently announced as one of the first four canon novels to be released in 2014 and 2015.

==
Impact ==
Lords of the Sith introduces Moff Delian Mors, a lesbian whom New York Daily News noted is the first openly gay character in the new Star Wars canon.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Lords of the Sith on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Admiral Firmus Piett is a fictional character from the Star Wars franchise, first introduced and portrayed by Kenneth Colley in the 1980 film The Empire Strikes Back.
As a supporting villain in command of Darth Vader's flagship, Executor, Piett is generally considered to be the most prominent Imperial officer in the film.
He subsequently appeared in the sequel Return of the Jedi, making him the only officer in the original trilogy to appear in more than one film and be portrayed by the same actor.
Piett also appears in the canon Star Wars novel Lost Stars, and is featured in several more novels, comic books, and video games within the Star Wars Legends line.

==
Character ==


===
Development ===
Piett was a creation of George Lucas and Lawrence Kasdan for The Empire
Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi.
Kasdan was aware that there was fun to be had in giving more depth and variability to his background characters, not only to help viewers identify them, but to remind his audience that much of the Empire consisted of people just doing their jobs.
Although Admiral Piett's true first appearance in the Star Wars universe was one month prior to the release of the Empire Strikes Back in the film's novelization, he was brought to life to audiences around the world by British actor Kenneth Colley, who was cast in the role.
Colley recalls that Empire Strikes
Back director Irvin Kershner stated that for Piett, he was "looking for someone that would frighten Adolf Hitler", and told Colley after meeting him, "Yes, I think you’re it".
In playing the role, Colley chose not to portray a singular attitude for the character; but instead attempted to bring forth a more true to life humanity in Piett's character, something that he believes ultimately sat quite well with audiences.

==
Appearances ==


===
Film ===


====
The Empire Strikes Back ====
Piett serves in the Galactic Empire as first officer and captain of the Super Star Destroyer, Executor, Darth Vader's flagship.
While in search of the Rebel base, under the command of Admiral Ozzel, Piett receives a suspicious transmission from an Imperial probe droid located in the Hoth system.
Although dismissed and ignored by Admiral Ozzel, Piett supersedes his superior and informs Vader of the transmission; which in fact does turn out to be the hidden Rebel Alliance headquarters, Echo Base.
Vader then dispatches the Imperial fleet to Hoth; however, Ozzel orders the fleet to exit hyperspace too close to the planet, enabling them to be detected by the Rebels, who raise an energy shield to stop any orbital bombardment.
Ozzel is quickly executed by Vader for this incompetence.
Vader then promotes Piett to Admiral, giving him full command of the Destroyer.
After the Battle of Hoth, Piett is tasked with the pursuit of the Millennium Falcon, which has escaped into a nearby asteroid field.
Piett informs Vader of this, whilst Vader is in his meditation chamber aboard the Executor; in doing so, Piett becomes the first onscreen character to see Vader without his helmet.
Vader at first ignores Piett's concern over venturing into the field, but later commands the admiral to move the ship away from the asteroids, in order to gain a clear signal for Vader's communication with Emperor Palpatine.
Vader subsequently hires bounty hunters to assist in the capture of the Millennium Falcon, a decision which Piett appears to disdain.
With the Falcon continuing to evade capture, Vader executes Star Destroyer Avenger captain Lorth Needa, conveying his displeasure as an ominous warning to Piett.
With bounty hunter Boba Fett tracking the Falcon to Cloud City on Bespin, Piett has his engineers deactivate the hyperdrive on the ship.
Later attempting to escape, the Millennium Falcon, and those within it, are nearly captured when Piett orders the activation of the Executor's tractor beam.
However, the Falcon unexpectedly jumps to light-speed and evades capture, as R2-D2 is able to reactivate the hyperdrive.
Despite his failure, a visibly terrified Piett finds his life uncharacteristically spared by Vader at the end of the film.

====
Return of the Jedi ====
In the following film, Admiral Piett is in command of the Imperial fleet at the Battle of Endor, still aboard the Executor.
He first appears in the film when a covert team of Rebels, led by Han Solo aboard the stolen Imperial shuttle, Tydirium, attempt to transmit an older valid security code, to allow them shield access and entry to the forest moon of Endor.
Piett is then interrupted by Vader, who informs Piett that he will deal with the shuttle personally.
During the Rebel attack on the second Death Star, Piett receives orders from Emperor Palpatine himself to hold position and keep the Rebels from escaping from the Death Star's fully operational superlaser.
The plan is disrupted when the Rebels are ordered by Admiral Ackbar to attack the Star Destroyers at point-blank range, concentrating their fire on the Executor.
After the Rebel fleet knocks out the shields protecting the bridge, Piett commands his men to increase firepower to keep anything from getting through.
A disabled A-wing fighter, piloted by Arvel Crynyd, then makes a kamikaze maneuver into the Executor's bridge, with Piett and Commander Gherant diving into the lower command deck.
The incapacitated Destroyer then plunges into the Death Star, exploding in a plume of flame, as Piett meets his demise.
===
Novels ===
As stated in the 2015 Ultimate Star Wars reference book, Piett was born on the Outer Rim world of Axxila, and is confirmed to have the first name Firmus within the new canon.
Piett later joins the Imperial Starfleet, and appears in the novel Lost Stars, set eight years after the Clone Wars, under the command of Grand Moff Tarkin at an Imperial annexation on the planet Jelucan.

===
Star Wars Legends ===
Piett has appeared in many novels, comics and video games, now considered to be non-canon and part of Star Wars Legends.
He is given a much deeper backstory in these various media; As a young lieutenant, Piett impresses Vader with his skill and loyalty, and the Sith lord soon promotes him to captain of the Star Destroyer Accuser and makes him a member of the Empire's "Death Squadron".
Winning widespread respect for his survival after the events of The Empire Strikes Back, Piett also participates in the Battle of Mygeeto, before the events leading to his death in Return of the Jedi.

== Reception ==
Over time, the character has become a favorite amongst fans, due to his unusual longevity.
According to Colley, the character of Piett was not originally slated to appear in Return of the Jedi, but George Lucas added him because Lucasfilm had received "a lot of fan mail" about the character.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Firmus Piett on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Admiral Piett in the StarWars.com Databank
Admiral Piett on IMDb
Star Wars:
Aftermath is a trilogy of Star Wars science fiction novels by American author Chuck Wendig.
Set soon after the events of the 1983 film Return of the Jedi, the series explores the time period between that film and 2015's The Force Awakens.
The trilogy began in 2015 with Aftermath, which was followed by the sequels Aftermath:
Life Debt (2016) and Aftermath: Empire's End (2017).
Aftermath is one of the projects in "Journey to Star Wars:
The Force Awakens", a 2015 Star Wars publishing initiative to connect The Force Awakens with previous film installments.

The Aftermath trilogy features the characters Wedge Antilles, an X-wing fighter pilot from the original Star Wars film trilogy, and Imperial Admiral Rae Sloane, introduced as a captain in John Jackson Miller's 2014 novel A New Dawn.
Wendig also introduces several new characters, including ex-Rebel Alliance pilot Norra Wexley, her teenage son Temmin "Snap" Wexley, Temmin's rebuilt B1 battle droid Mister Bones, the Zabrak bounty hunter Jas Emari, and the Imperial turncoat Sinjir Rath Velus, one of the first gay characters in Star Wars canon.

The first novel of the trilogy debuted at No.
4 on The New York Times Best Seller list, and No.
4 on USA Today's best seller list.

==
Publication ==
In March 2015, Disney Publishing Worldwide and Lucasfilm announced the "Journey to Star Wars:
The Force Awakens" publishing initiative, a collection of novels and comic books from multiple publishers intended to connect The Force Awakens with previous film installments.
Among the first planned releases, the originating 2015 novel Aftermath was subsequently described as being set between the films Return of the Jedi and The Force Awakens.
The Hollywood Reporter called the novel "arguably the centerpiece of the Journey line.
In July 2015, Del Rey confirmed that Aftermath would be the first novel in a planned trilogy.
Aftermath was published on September 4, 2015, and the titles for the other installments—Life Debt and Empire's End—were announced at the New York Comic Con in October 2015.
Life Debt was released on July 12, 2016, and Empire's End was released on February 21, 2017.

==
Impact ==
The Aftermath series features the characters Wedge Antilles, an X-wing fighter pilot from the original Star Wars film trilogy, and Imperial Admiral Rae Sloane, introduced as a captain in John Jackson Miller's 2014 novel A New Dawn.
Wendig introduces several new characters in Aftermath, including the Zabrak bounty hunter Jas Emari, the Imperial turncoat Sinjir Rath Velus, ex-Rebel pilot Norra Wexley, Norra's teenage son
Temmin "Snap" Wexley, and Temmin's rebuilt B1 battle droid Mister Bones.
Temmin next appeared in the sequel films
The Force Awakens (2015) and
The Rise of Skywalker (2019) as an X-wing fighter pilot Snap Wexley, portrayed by Greg Grunberg.
Introduced in the first installment Aftermath, SpecForces officer Jom Barell becomes a main character as a member of the team in Life Debt.
Acknowledging lesbian Moff Delian Mors from Paul S. Kemp's 2015 novel Star Wars: Lords of the Sith as the first openly gay character in the Star Wars canon, Anthony Breznican of Entertainment Weekly called Aftermath's Sinjir "the first major gay hero" in the franchise.
After receiving some fan backlash, Wendig defended the inclusion of a gay character on his blog, writing "If you can imagine a world where Luke Skywalker would be irritated that there were gay people around him, you completely missed the point of Star Wars."
The trilogy also introduced secondary character Cobb Vanth, the sheriff of Freetown on the desert planet Tatooine, via an interlude chapter in each of the three novels.
Known to have acquired the distinctive armor of Mandalorian bounty hunter Boba Fett, Vanth is portrayed by Timothy Olyphant in season two of
the Disney+ series The Mandalorian.
Empire's End features a reappearance of Lando Calrissian, who reclaims control of Bespin's Cloud City from the Imperials who occupy it.
Chewbacca is reunited with his young son Lumpawaroo, who had been enslaved on their native planet Kashyyyk.
Prequel trilogy character Jar Jar Binks appears in the novel, having become a street performer who entertains refugee children but is loathed by adults who blame him for his part in the rise of the Empire.
Chris Taylor of Mashable wrote that the situation reflects real life in that adults disliked Jar Jar in the films, but children were entertained by him.
Ben Solo, the son of Leia and Han who becomes Kylo Ren, is born on the planet Chandrila, the day a peace treaty is signed between the Empire and the New Galactic Republic.
Rae Sloane coins the term "First Order" as she establishes the reborn empire that will eventually take that name.
General Hux, a character introduced in the 2015 film Star Wars:
The Force Awakens, appears as a child in Empire's End; his father is the creator of the training program that will ultimately produce First Order stormtroopers.
Hux's first name (Armitage) and origin as the illegitimate son of Imperial officer Brendol Hux was previously revealed in Life Debt.
The Chiss Grand Admiral Thrawn is mentioned in Empire's End as the source of the information about the Unknown Regions which Palpatine uses in his Contingency plan, and the novel is the first appearance of  Niima the Hutt, a crime lord based on the desert planet Jakku who controls her people by controlling their resources.
The Star Wars:
The Force Awakens:
The Visual Dictionary (2015) and Star Wars: Rey's Survival Guide (2015) note that the Niima Outpost is named after her.

== Works ==


===
Aftermath (2015) ===
Star Wars:
Aftermath is the first novel in Wendig's Aftermath trilogy.
It was published by Del Rey Books on September 4, 2015.

====
Plot ====
Darth Vader and Emperor Palpatine have fallen and the second Death Star has been destroyed, but the Rebel Alliance—now calling itself the New Republic—has yet to fully subdue the scattered forces of the Empire that remain.
Stumbling upon a hub of Imperial activity on the Outer Rim planet Akiva, Rebel pilot Wedge Antilles is captured by Admiral Rae Sloane.
Meanwhile, his wartime comrade Norra Wexley has also arrived on the planet to reunite with her teenage son Temmin.
Former Imperial officer Sinjir Rath Velus, living quietly on Akiva following the disastrous Battle of Endor, is unhappy to find the Empire at his door, and Zabrak bounty hunter Jas Emari's latest contract leads her to a wealth of valuable targets.

====
Critical reception ====
Aftermath debuted at No.
4 on The New York Times Best Seller list, and No.
4 on USA Today's best seller list.
IGN's Jared Petty awarded the novel a score of 5.9 out of ten, saying "Star Wars: Aftermath is a well-written but ultimately disappointing first look into the post-Endor galaxy."
===
Aftermath:
Life Debt (2016) ===
Star Wars:
Aftermath:
Life Debt is the second novel in Wendig's Aftermath trilogy.
It was published by Del Rey Books on July 12, 2016.

==== Plot ====
Former Rebel Alliance pilot Norra Wexley, her teenage son Temmin, the Zabrak bounty hunter Jas Emari, the former Imperial officer Sinjir Rath Velus, and the SpecForces officer Jom Barell have become a ragtag team working to collect Imperials whom the New Republic wants to bring to justice.
Fresh from their latest mission, the team is asked by General Leia Organa to find her husband Han Solo, who has gone missing during a personal mission to free the Wookiees on the enslaved planet Kashyyyk.
The group finds Han and helps him free an imprisoned Chewbacca and a score of longtime Imperial prisoners—among them Norra's husband, Brentin.

Under the secret guidance of the deceased Emperor Palpatine's former advisor, Gallius Rax, Grand Admiral Rae Sloane works to consolidate the remnants of the Empire's forces.
Rax reveals the existence of an extensive Imperial fleet, and gathers a selective group of former imperials to form his "Shadow Council".
Though their goals seem aligned, Sloane becomes increasingly distrustful of Rax as she begins to discover the extent of his machinations.

With the last minute aid of Leia, Wedge Antilles, and Admiral Ackbar, Han's team frees Kashyyyk from Imperial rule.
Meanwhile, as the New Republic celebrates the liberation of the prisoners, Rax's insidious plan comes to fruition.
Brainwashed to kill, Brentin and the other prisoners suddenly attack Chancellor Mon Mothma and other New Republic political and military targets, as well as civilians.
Disgusted by Rax's tactics and realizing that her attaché Adea Rite is under his command, Sloane flees.
Injured by Norra, she aligns herself with Brentin, who is desperate to avenge himself on Rax.
They find Rax as he arrives at his homeworld of Jakku with his fleet.

====
Critical reception ====
IGN's Jared Petty awarded the novel a score of 6.8 out of ten, saying "Star Wars Life Debt: Aftermath is an interesting but uneven return to a galaxy far, far away."
===
Aftermath:
Empire's End (2017) ===
Star Wars:
Empire's End is the third novel in Wendig's Aftermath trilogy.
It was published by Del Rey Books on February 21, 2017.
====
Plot ====
Using information gleaned from the bounty hunter Mercurial Swift, the team of former Rebel Alliance pilot Norra Wexley, her teenage son Temmin, the Zabrak bounty hunter Jas Emari, and the former Imperial officer Sinjir Rath Velus track Grand Admiral Rae Sloane to the desolate planet Jakku.
They arrive to find the remaining Imperial fleet of Star Destroyers in orbit; Norra and Jas head to the surface seeking Sloane, while Temmin and Sinjir escape to Chandrila to alert Leia Organa and the New Republic.
Norra and Jas are captured by Imperial stormtroopers; Norra is enslaved, and Jas—who has a bounty on her head—is handed over to the crime lord Niima the Hutt.
Temmin's reprogrammed B1 battle droid Mister Bones rescues Norra, and they reunite with an escaped Jas.
Sloane and Norra's estranged husband Brentin seek revenge against Gallius Rax, but are captured by him instead.
Meanwhile, the indecisive New Republic Senate fails to approve a military offensive against the Imperial forces at Jakku.

Sinjir recruits former SpecForces operative Jom Barell for a covert mission with Temmin, Han Solo, and Sinjir's sometimes lover Conder Kyl to identify the leverage which the Black Sun and Red Key criminal syndicates used to influence the vote.
Their efforts provide Chancellor Mon Mothma with the votes she needs, and the motion passes.
Led by Admiral Ackbar, the New Republic forces attack with Temmin flying an X-wing under Wedge Antilles' command, and Jom rejoining SpecForces.
Sloane and Brentin learn of Rax's insidious program which trains abducted children to be vicious killers.
Norra finally intercepts Sloane, but postpones her revenge to join her nemesis in finding out what Rax is protecting in his desert base.
The battle turns for the New Republic when the Imperial dreadnought Ravager is destroyed.
Mister Bones saves Temmin's life, but the droid is destroyed.
Sloane confronts Rax, who has commenced what Palpatine called his "Contingency": the Jakku Observatory will destroy the planet and the entirety of both the Imperial and New Republic forces, plunging the galaxy into chaos.
Rax will flee on a predetermined course to the Unknown Regions with a select few Destroyers, where he will create a new empire.
Sloane kills Rax and stops Jakku's destruction, but assumes Rax's role as shepherd of Palpatine's plans.

Sinjir becomes an advisor to Mothma, who escapes an assassination attempt, and Brentin and Jom are killed on Jakku.
Leia gives birth to Ben Solo, her son with Han, as the Empire formally surrenders.
Wedge establishes a flight academy on Hosnian Prime, where he and Norra will be instructors, and Temmin—now officially known as "Snap"—will attend.

====
Critical reception ====
Sean Keane of the New York Daily News called Empire's End a "thrilling conclusion" to the trilogy.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Aftermath on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Aftermath:
Life Debt on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Aftermath: Empire's End on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Star Wars:
Thrawn (also known simply as Thrawn) is a Star Wars novel by Timothy Zahn, published on April 11, 2017 by Del Rey Books.
It chronicles the origins of Grand Admiral Thrawn, a popular character originating from the Star Wars Legends line of works, which were declared non-canon to the franchise after Disney redefined Star Wars continuity in April 2014.
The novel was announced in July 2016 alongside news that the character Thrawn would be reintroduced into the Star Wars franchise on the 3D CGI animated television series Star Wars Rebels.

A sequel, titled Thrawn: Alliances, was released in July 2018.
A third novel, Thrawn: Treason, was released in July 2019.

==
Plot ==
Found on an unnamed Outer Rim planet, the exiled Chiss warrior Thrawn pledges himself to Emperor Palpatine and joins the Imperial navy.
Thrawn's cunning and expertise as a tactician help him to rise through the ranks with unprecedented speed, though his renegade tactics ignite the ire of his superiors.
At Thrawn's side is his translator-turned-aide-de-camp, Ensign Eli Vanto, whom he trains in the ways of war.
Meanwhile, ruthless administrator Arihnda Pryce plots her own rise to power.

==
Development ==
The character of Thrawn was originally introduced in Zahn's 1991 novel Heir to the Empire, and became a fan favorite.
He went on to appear in several other novels, short stories, comics, and video games.
Following the 2012 acquisition of Lucasfilm by The Walt Disney Company, most of the licensed Star Wars fiction produced since the originating 1977 film Star Wars were rebranded as Star Wars Legends and declared non-canon to the franchise in April 2014.In a prerecorded video, Zahn announced at the London Star Wars Celebration in July 2016 that he was writing a new novel for Del Rey Books titled Thrawn.
The same day, Del Rey confirmed on Twitter the novel's spring 2017 release.
In a subsequent interview with StarWars.com, Zahn noted that the novel would cover several years between Thrawn's "first encounter" with the Empire and the events of the third season of Star Wars Rebels, an animated television series in which the character will appear prior to the book's release.
He said:

It's very exciting [to write Thrawn again].
A writer never knows which characters are going to click with the readers, and it was highly gratifying to me that Thrawn captured the imaginations of so many people over the past quarter century.
Over the years I've written a lot of books and stories that featured him, but with this book I'll be visiting a part of his life that I never before had a chance to explore.

Asked if he would be incorporating any material from previous Thrawn novels, Zahn said, "I've thrown in a few bits and pieces.
Nothing too blatant, just little Easter eggs for those who are familiar with my other books.
"
Though in Legends works Thrawn was mostly used in post-Return of the Jedi storylines, both Rebels and Thrawn take place prior to the events of the original 1977 film and show his rise to power.
Zahn said, "I get to show how he's treated by his fellow officers and shipmates on his way up the military ladder, particularly when he's not in a command position over them.
"A full synopsis of the novel was released in January 2017, followed by an excerpt in March 2017.

==
Publication ==
Thrawn was published on April 11, 2017.
Del Rey Books produced three variant covers: the standard edition is white, featuring Thrawn's face split by the spine; the Barnes & Noble-exclusive edition has the same cover design in black, with a double-sided pull out poster that has a Thrawn portrait on one side and the Del Rey novel timeline on the other; and
the Star Wars Celebration limited edition has a textless cover with Thrawn's full face, the portrait on the back cover, and special end papers.

== Reception ==
Adrian Liang of Omnivoracious called the novel "a solid addition to the new official Star Wars novels", noting that "the Thrawn POV chapters are the weakest" while the Vanto sections "provide the most insight and entertainment."
==
Comic adaptation ==
In July 2017, Marvel Comics announced that a comic book miniseries adaptation of Thrawn is scheduled for release in early 2018.

The first issue was released on February 14, 2018, with five more to follow on a monthly basis.

==
Sequels ==


===
Thrawn: Alliances ===
A sequel to Thrawn, titled Thrawn: Alliances, was announced during New York Comic Con in October 2017.
The novel was scheduled to be released on June 26, 2018, but was later delayed to July 24, 2018.
The cover artwork was revealed in November 2017, and an excerpt was released on the official Star Wars website on March 23, 2018.
The excerpt was the first canon appearance of the planet Batuu, which was featured in Star Wars: Galaxy's Edge, the new theme park expansion at Disneyland and Disney's Hollywood Studios, in 2019.
Thrawn: Alliances was released by Del Rey Books on July 24, 2018, and debuted at #1 on The New York Times Best Seller list.
Thrawn: Alliances focuses on Thrawn's partnership with Darth Vader, whom he meets at the conclusion of Thrawn.
In the novel, Grand Admiral Thrawn and Darth Vader are sent on a mission to the unknown regions to explore a disturbance in the Force felt by Emperor Palpatine.
The mission is more than that however, as Thrawn's split loyalties between the Empire and his native people the Chiss and Vader's past as a Jedi require a test of loyalty for both.
The book also features flashbacks to a Clone Wars conflict featuring Thrawn and Anakin Skywalker.

===
Thrawn: Treason ===
In December 2018, it was announced that Timothy Zahn would write and publish another Thrawn sequel, titled Thrawn: Treason.
The novel was released by Del Rey Books on July 23, 2019, and debuted at #5 on The New York Times Best Seller list.
The novel explores the crisis Thrawn encounters when he discovers that his people are in peril, forcing him to choose between loyalty to the Empire or loyalty to the Chiss Ascendancy.

==
Prequels ==


===
Chaos
Rising ===
At the 2019 New York Comic Con, a new trilogy from Zahn was announced, to be entitled Thrawn: The Ascendency Trilogy, or simply the Thrawn Ascendancy trilogy, to launch with Book I:
Chaos Rising in May 2020.
After being delayed twice, the first novel was ultimately released on September 1, 2020.The prequel follows Thrawn's original rise through the ranks of the Chiss Ascendancy and the allies and enemies he collects along the way.

===
Greater Good ===
In October 2020 a sequel to Chaos Rising was announced, titled Greater Good, which is set for a May 4, 2021 release.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Thrawn on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Moff Gideon is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise who first appeared in the Disney+ television series The Mandalorian.
Gideon is the leader of a remnant of the fallen Galactic Empire, and attempts to capture the young alien Grogu, who is being protected by the title character of the series.

Gideon is portrayed by Giancarlo Esposito.
He was recruited for the part by The Mandalorian creator and showrunner Jon Favreau, who had previously worked with Esposito on several projects.
Gideon is portrayed as a dangerous and fierce man who, "seems to know everything about everyone", and does not hesitate to kill anyone to get what he wants, including his own men.
The character did not make his first appearance until the penultimate episode of the first season, with Esposito saying he would play a larger role in the second season.

Esposito has rejected simple classifications of Gideon as a "good" or "bad" character, noting that he is attempting to restore order to a lawless galaxy and could arguably be seen as a "savior".
Gideon's all-black costume has been compared to that of Star Wars character Darth Vader, and reviewers have noted similarities in their personalities and behavior as well.
Moff Gideon has been received positively by reviewers and fans.
Esposito was nominated for a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Guest Actor in a Drama Series for his performance.

==
Appearances ==


===
Backstory ===
Few details of his backstory have been revealed.
Gideon was previously an operative in the Imperial Security Bureau, a covert intelligence arm and secret police for the Galactic Empire.
Prior to the events of The Mandalorian, Gideon played a role in the Great Purge, an oppressive combat operation against a culture known as the Mandalorians, which resulted in many of them being killed and the survivors becoming scattered across the galaxy.
Gideon knows information about the show's title character, otherwise known as "The Mandalorian", including his identity, due to his role in the Purge.
The term "Moff" is a title for a high-ranking Imperial official who served as a governor of a specific sector of space for the Empire.
Its first use dates back to the original Star Wars (1977) film, most notably with the character Grand Moff Tarkin, though the word "Moff" is not used in that film and the character is only identified by that title in the end credits.

Gideon's life drastically changed after the fall of the Empire, and he became a warlord leading his own Imperial remnant.
As the character Cara Dune states in the show, it was widely believed Gideon had been executed for war crimes before the series began.
In The Mandalorian, Gideon is attempting to capture a young alien Grogu, also known as "The Child", to extract its blood for Dr. Pershing's secret experiments.
Just prior to Gideon's first appearance on The Mandalorian, he dispatched his forces to eliminate the Mandalorian tribe on the planet Nevarro after they revealed their presence there during the episode "Chapter 3: The Sin".
===
Season one ===
Gideon made his first appearance in "Chapter 7:
The Reckoning", the penultimate episode of the first season of The Mandalorian.
He first appears when he contacts "The Client", an unnamed Imperial operative working to obtain Grogu for Gideon.
The Client is meeting with the bounty hunter Greef Karga and his associate Cara Dune at a cantina on the planet Nevarro.
He is under the impression that Greef has brought Grogu to him, along with the imprisoned Mandalorian, who had been trying to protect Grogu from the Empire.
In reality, Grogu is not with them, and the meeting is a trap arranged by the Mandalorian and his allies to kill the Client and his stormtoopers.
When Gideon contacts the Client during the meeting, the Client assures him he has Grogu in his custody.
Gideon suggests that is not the case, then orders a squadron of his own stormtroopers to open fire on the cantina, killing the Client and his troops.
Afterwards, the cantina is surrounded by stormtroopers and Death Troopers, and Gideon lands his modified TIE fighter outside the building and emerges, informing the trapped Mandalorian, Cara, and Greef that he wants Grogu.
Gideon returns in the season finale episode, "Chapter 8: Redemption", in which he speaks to the Mandalorian and his party from outside the cantina, demanding they turn Grogu over to him.
Gideon reveals he knows secret details about all of them, and refers to the Mandalorian by his real name, Din Djarin, marking the first time this name was revealed in the show.
When the droid IG-11 arrives to assist the Mandalorian and his allies, a brief gunfight breaks out between them and the stormtroopers.
During this fight, Gideon seriously injures and nearly kills the Mandalorian by shooting a power generator near him, causing an explosion.
The Mandalorian and his party escape from the Imperials, but Gideon later encounters them elsewhere on the planet, where Gideon attacks them from above with his TIE fighter while they are on the ground.
The Mandalorian uses his jetpack to fly after and attack Gideon's starfighter, connecting his grapple hook to the wing after briefly clinging to the top of the TIE fighter in mid-air.
He places an explosive charge on the ship and it explodes, causing the damaged TIE fighter to crash in the distance, which allows the Mandalorian and his allies to escape.
In the final scene of the episode and season, Gideon is shown to have survived the crash, and he extracts himself from the wreckage by cutting through the TIE fighter's metal exterior with the Darksaber, a black-bladed lightsaber which is an ancient Mandalorian artifact.

===
Season two ===
In "Chapter 11: The Heiress", Gideon is contacted by the captain of an Imperial freighter on the oceanic moon Trask, which was come under siege by the Mandalorian and a group of other Mandalorian warriors led by Bo-Katan Kryze, who is targeting Imperial cargo ships in the hopes of reclaiming the Darksaber.
Deeming the ship doomed, Gideon orders the captain to destroy it and everyone aboard.
The Mandalorians manage to prevent the ship's destruction, though the captain commits suicide, more afraid of Gideon than Bo-Katan Kryze.

Gideon's plan is partially revealed in "Chapter 12: The Siege", in which the Mandalorian, Greef, Cara, and their Mythrol companion infiltrate a secret cloning facility at an Imperial base on Nevarro.
There, they discover several bodies encased in tanks and a recorded message from Dr. Pershing to Gideon.
Pershing states that he requires access to Grogu's blood, which is needed to provide a body with Force-sensitivity.
However, several of the experiments have resulted in failure.
Gideon makes a physical appearance at the end of the episode, standing in a chamber filled with Dark Troopers, aboard his cruiser.
An officer informs him that the Mandalorian is still in possession of Grogu and that a tracking beacon has been placed on his ship, the Razor Crest.

In "Chapter 14:
The Tragedy", Gideon tracks the Mandalorian to Tython and sends two shuttles of stormtroopers to capture Grogu.
While the Mandalorian and the recently arrived Boba Fett and Fennec Shand fight them off, they fail to prevent Grogu from being taken by four of Gideon's Dark Troopers, and the Razor Crest from being destroyed by an orbital strike from Gideon's cruiser.
Escaping with Grogu, Gideon witnesses him using his Force powers on two stormtroopers that he throws around his holding cell, before stunning him and preparing to take him to Dr. Pershing to complete the blood transfusion.

In "Chapter 16:
The Rescue", the Mandalorian and his team infiltrate Gideon's ship, where Grogu is held hostage.
Gideon offers Grogu to the Mandalorian on the condition that he leave the ship.
However, Gideon attacks the Mandalorian with the Darksaber.
The Mandalorian wins the duel and hands Gideon over to Cara Dune.
When the Mandalorian tries to give the Darksaber to Bo-Katan, Gideon reveals that the wielder of the blade has a claim to the throne of Mandalore and the blade can only be won in battle.
A squadron of dark troopers attempt to rescue Gideon, but they are destroyed by Luke Skywalker, who has come to take Grogu for him to be trained as a Jedi.
Defeated, Gideon attempts suicide, but is foiled and taken into custody.

== Characterization ==
Gideon is a dangerous and fierce man, who does not hesitate to harm or kill anyone to get what he wants.
Though leading a remnant of the Galactic Empire, Gideon freely admits that he acts in his own self-interest, and in the first-season finale of The Mandalorian he explicitly states to the Mandalorian and his allies that they cannot trust him and he would gladly kill them all.
Gideon does not hesitate to kill his own men when they fail him, or even for mere annoyances, like when they interrupt him.
Sly, intimidating, and unforgiving, Gideon is extremely determined to achieve his goals, and is willing to sacrifice the lives of his men to get Grogu.
His motivation to get Grogu appears personal, as he tells the Mandalorian: "it means more to me than you will ever
know".
Gideon is a strong military strategist, and despite the fall of the Empire still wields power, commanding a considerable number of Imperial forces, including people, equipment, and spaceships.
Stephanie Dube Dwilson of Heavy.com noted that while many of the remnant Imperial stormtroopers featured throughout the first season had worn and dirty armor, the troopers under Gideon's command had new and pristine armor, reflecting Gideon's stature.
Through his past association with the Imperial Security Bureau, Gideon had access to a great deal of classified intelligence, and as a result he is extremely knowledgeable about topics unknown to most other characters in the series.
Giancarlo Esposito said the character "seems to know everything about everyone", as illustrated in the season finale, when he reveals he knows the names and biographical details of the Mandalorian, Cara Dune, and Greef Karga.
Esposito has rejected simple classifications of Gideon as a "good" or "bad" character, noting that he is attempting to restore stability to the galaxy following the fall of the Empire.
Esposito felt Gideon becomes "sort of the guardian of the people" after the Empire's decline, and that in attempting to bring order to a lawless time, the character could be seen as a "savior".
Esposito said of the character: "Is he good?
Is he bad?
We don't know.
We do know that the world needs someone to put it back together."
He felt this moral ambiguity was particularly applicable to the real world at the time in which the series was released, saying: "
Leaders who exhibit kind of a faulty power because they still have ideas that they want to aggrandize themselves; we're in that world now."
Gideon has a vision for the future, and a strong personal sense of order, one of the driving principles of the Empire, which had a militaristic approach to policing the galaxy that Gideon also embraces.
Several reviewers have suggested that Gideon may be actively attempting to emulate Darth Vader, one of the major characters from the Star Wars franchise who had been an agent of the Empire.
Gideon's personality and behavior also bear similarities to Vader, including his tendency to execute underlings who disappoint him.
Kevin Melrose of Comic Book Resources also noted that Gideon's TIE fighter crash near the end of the first-season finale is similar to Vader's final scene in the original Star Wars film, when his own TIE Advanced fighter is sent spiraling out of control into space.

==
Concept and creation ==


===
Portrayal ===
Moff Gideon is portrayed in The Mandalorian by Giancarlo Esposito.
He was recruited for the part by series creator and showrunner Jon Favreau.
Esposito and Favreau had previously worked together on several previous projects, starting with the pilot for the post-apocalyptic science fiction television series Revolution, which Favreau directed and in which Esposito starred.
Favreau next directed Esposito in a commercial for the video game Destiny, which led to Favreau casting him in his film adaptation of The Jungle Book (2016).
Esposito said one of the first things he did after accepting the role was to contact his friend Samuel L. Jackson, the actor who portrayed Mace Windu in the Star Wars prequel trilogy, and say: "Yo man, I'm in that series too, dude!"The casting of Esposito was announced on December 12, 2018.
Details about his character were not immediately revealed, though there was early speculation he might be playing a villain due to his past performance as Gus Fring, one of the primary antagonists of Breaking Bad and an important character in its spinoff
Better Call Saul.
Footage of Gideon was first publicly shown at the Star Wars Celebration convention in Chicago on April 14, 2019, which included a brief shot of the character flying his TIE Fighter.
Esposito was on-hand at the D23 Expo on August 23, 2019, for the release of the first public trailer of The Mandalorian.
Gideon also appeared briefly in a second trailer released on October 28, 2019.In preparation for the role, Esposito rewatched the Star Wars films to get a sense of the "style of the films" and to try to get feeling for what it would be like to be in that fictional universe.
Esposito was a fan of the original Star Wars trilogy film prior to joining The Mandalorian, though he said he was less interested in the later prequel films because they "became more and more in a different vein than what I wanted to be in".
Regarding the original Star Wars films, Esposito said:
For me, these films, they formed a part of my childhood and they gave me the ability to dream and to feel like they would take me to another place.
And when you have a film that does that in an imaginary world that could be so real, it's very exciting for you.
They taught me how to feel like a champion, how to feel like there are always going to be challenges but that if we are able to come together as a family somehow
and if I can believe in myself, I can overcome anything.

Esposito was disappointed with the lack of diversity in the older Star Wars films and appreciated that there were more minority actors in the later productions, as well as in the cast of The Mandalorian, which he credited to Favreau.
He called being cast as Moff Gideon "a dream come true", and said of the role:
"He's a very interesting character
and I'm so honored to be a part of this production.
"
After the show aired, Giancarlo said two of his four daughters sent him text messages urging him not to hurt the Child, who had become an internet sensation.
Esposito said he jokingly responded: "I will squash that little big-eared bastard."
===
Costume ===
Moff Gideon's costume was designed by Brian Matyas, concept designer and artist for The Mandalorian.
He called designing Gideon's costume "one of the highlights for me on the show, and for my career as a whole".
The costume was created based upon the design by costume designer Joseph Porro, with props and costume fabrication by Frank Ippolito via
Ippolito's company Thingergy Inc. The costume is all-black and includes body armor, a cape, and an elaborate chest piece, and several reviewers have noted the costume's similarities to that of Star Wars character Darth Vader.
Esposito called his costume "incredible", and said he wanted to keep his costume and props after filming, but was not able to: "They said to me, it's all going to wind up in a museum.
You're going to be so honored when you see it there in a couple of years.
But you can't have it now."
===
Filming ===
Esposito's scenes for The Mandalorian were filmed on a sound stage in Southern California on a "Volume", a large warehouse-like motion-capture stage with green screens and tracking cameras spread throughout the space.
Using a combination of physical set pieces and images projected onto the screens, the Volume allows the actors to be filmed and placed into a digital environment.
Esposito said of filming scenes in the Volume: "we can control the physical atmosphere of what is projected on the walls and control how gravity is; you get a feeling that gravity is being played
with".
Esposito particularly enjoyed working with Taika Waititi, the director of the season finale, who he described as "in his own world creatively" and called "a very different and odd human being, but aren't we all as creative artists?
"
The sequences with Moff Gideon flying his TIE Fighter were filmed in the Volume, and Waititi was very detail-oriented in working with Esposito on the scenes.
For example, Waititi gave Esposito very specific feedback on what he felt Esposito should be doing with his feet during the final scene when he cuts himself free of the crashed TIE Fighter.
Esposito found this direction confusing, saying: "What's bugging you about the way my feet are?
I'm on [a] globe 30 feet in [the] sky."
Esposito said he enjoyed seeing and interacting with the animatronic puppet of Grogu during filming, saying: "It melts my heart, because the reality is, this little baby does things that you could never imagine and when you look at those eyes and that little body, how can you not help but fall in love?
"
Esposito had not seen the finished footage of The Mandalorian until a few months before the show aired.

== Reception ==
Moff Gideon has been received positively by reviewers and fans alike.
Scott Snowden of Space.com said Giancarlo Esposito "plays the role to perfection".
Sean Keane of CNET called the character "absolutely magnificent" and "pretty damn scary".
Screen Rant writer Kiki Evans said Moff Gideon "makes quite a terrifying villain".
Kevin Pantoja, also from Screen Rant, said the character "immediately feels like a major threat" upon his introduction to the show.
Stephanie Dube Dwilson of Heavy.com said the character "strikes the perfect mix of potentially crazy and very powerful".
SyFy writer Matthew Jackson said though Gideon's appearance in the first season was brief, it was also impactful, writing: "The character quickly established himself as a force to be reckoned with."
Brian Silliman, also of SyFy, called Moff Gideon a "formidable" villain.
IGN writer Laura Prudom said the first season ends with
Moff Gideon positioned as "a worthy adversary" for the Mandalorian and his allies.
Ben Pearson of /Film said the character "made a big impact" in the season finale.
Caitlin Gallagher of Bustle noted that immediately after "Chapter 7:
The Reckoning" aired, many fans expressed "outrage, sadness, and anxiety" about Moff Gideon, particularly on social media websites, due to his role in the death of the character Kuiil and the kidnapping of the Child at the end of that episode.
Moff Gideon ranked second on a Screen Rant list of the most interesting characters from the first season of The Mandalorian, third on a separate list of the ten best characters from the show, and his costume was ranked seventh on a list of the ten best costumes in the first season.

For his performance as Gideon in the Season One finale, Esposito was nominated for a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Guest Actor in a Drama Series.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Gideon on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
The Client is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise who appears in the Disney+ television series The Mandalorian.
He is a mysterious, unnamed leader in the former Galactic Empire, and plays a key role in setting the show's story into motion by hiring the Mandalorian bounty hunter Din Djarin to retrieve a "50 year old", yet infantile alien, (later) named "Grogu".

The Client is portrayed by German film director, screenwriter, and actor Werner Herzog, who was recruited for the part by series creator and showrunner Jon Favreau.
Herzog accepted the role in part to help finance his film Family Romance, LLC (2019).
Herzog was not familiar with Favreau's previous work, nor had he ever seen a Star Wars film, but was impressed with the screenplays for The Mandalorian as well as the film-making style of the show.

Herzog particularly enjoyed filming scenes with the animatronic puppet of The Child, subsequently strongly urging Favreau to solely use the puppet for the character and not computer-generated imagery as had originally been intended for later scenes, calling them "cowards" for considering using CGI in its place.
The character and Herzog's performance have received positive reviews from critics.

== Appearances ==
Almost no details are provided about the Client's backstory, except that he is loyal to the remnant of the former Galactic Empire, which by this time has fallen from power after losing its war against the Rebel Alliance.
The character is never identified by name on the series and is known simply as "The Client".
He first appears in the series premiere episode "Chapter 1: The Mandalorian" of The Mandalorian, a Star Wars television series on the streaming service Disney+.
The show's protagonist, a bounty hunter known as "The Mandalorian", is placed into contact with the Client by Greef Karga, the leader of the Bounty Hunters' Guild headquartered on the planet Nevarro.
When the Mandalorian asks for work, Greef informs him that the Client is offering a mysterious, high-paying assignment, but will only meet with bounty hunters in person to discuss the matter.
A number of Imperial stormtroopers are present for the Mandalorian's meeting with the Client, during which the Client informs the bounty hunter that the target is an unnamed individual who is 50 years old.
Unbeknownst to the Mandalorian, this individual is a young alien creature known only as "The Child", a member of the same species as the Star Wars character Yoda.
Werner Herzog, the actor who portrays the Client, said that in this way, his character "sets the story on its path" by recruiting the Mandalorian to seek the Child.
The Client says he would prefer the Child be delivered to him alive, but that he is willing to pay a smaller amount for proof of termination.
As a down payment, the Client gives the Mandalorian a small bar of beskar, the rare metal traditionally used to create the virtually invulnerable body armor of his people.
The Client returns in the episode "Chapter 3:
The Sin", in which the Mandalorian brings him the captured Child.
The Client provides the Mandalorian the promised beskar steel in a white security container he identifies as a "camtono".
(
This container is identical in appearance to an ice cream maker that an extra carried while fleeing Cloud City in the Star Wars film
The Empire Strikes Back (1980).
The item and its purpose had been the subject of much discussion by fans over the years, but the Client's use of the camtono was the first time it had been identified within the universe/franchise.)

After collecting his payment, the Mandalorian asks what the Client plans to do with the Child, but the Client curtly reminds the Mandalorian that the Bounty Hunters' Guild forbids such questions.
Later, the Mandalorian uses technology to eavesdrop on the Client, and hears the Client order his Imperial colleague, Dr. Pershing, to "extract the necessary material" from the Child; the exact material is not identified and his reasons for wanting it are not explained.
Although Pershing notes they are supposed to return the Child to their employers alive, the Client insists he simply extract the material quickly and "be done with it".
The Mandalorian later returns to rescue the Child, killing all of the stormtroopers present and successfully fleeing the planet with the Child.
The Client was not present during the Mandalorian's rescue.
The Client makes his final appearance in the season's penultimate episode, "Chapter 7:
The Reckoning".
By this time, the Client had reinforced Nevarro with more stormtroopers, which had made it more difficult for the Bounty Hunters' Guild to operate there.
As a result, Greef Karga arranges for the Mandalorian to return so they can kill the Client and his troops and eliminate the Imperial presence from the planet.
The offer is a trap, and Greef plans to kill the Mandalorian and return the Child to the Client, but Greef has a change of heart after being healed by Grogu.
They devise a new plan to assassinate the Client  during a surreptitious meeting at a Nevarro cantina.
The scheme initially goes according to plan, with the Client believing the Mandalorian and the alien Child have both been captured.
Just as he asks to see the Child, the Client receives a hologram call from his superior, Moff Gideon, who rhetorically inquires about the Child; then presumably to punish his failure, orders a squad of six Death Troopers to open fire on the Client  from outside the cantina, through its main window.
The Client is seen shot through the chest and killed, as are all of his stormtrooper guards.
== Characterization ==
The Client is a mysterious figure, with little known about his history or motivations.
He is an untrustworthy and devious individual, described by Werner Herzog as "a dark, dark sort of figure that shouldn't be trusted at all".
He is an intimidating figure, as illustrated by the fact that Greef Karga, who is normally confident and commanding with others, acts cautiously and even fearfully in dealing with the Client.
He has an esoteric and existential manner of speaking, much like that of the real-life Herzog himself.
Variety writer Will Thorne has suggested the Client's dialogue may have been specifically tailored after Herzog's dark and eccentric personality, particularly citing lines like the one from "Chapter 7:
The Reckoning" in which the Client says: "Look outside: is the world more peaceful since the revolution?
I see nothing but death and chaos.
"
The Client is a cold and severe individual, as illustrated by his apathy over whether the Child lives or dies.
John Serba of Decider.com wrote that the Client was less like criminal characters featured in other Star Wars
works like Jabba the Hutt, and more similar to Vito Corleone, the mobster protagonist of The Godfather (1972).Herzog uses his own German accent for the part, providing what Serba called "instantly identifiable, idiosyncratic, intently articulate intonation".
The Client is obsessed with obtaining the Child, and as time passes over the series gets increasingly anxious about capturing him.
He truly believes in the mission and cause of the Galactic Empire, saying in "Chapter 7:
The Reckoning" that "the Empire improves every system it touches."
He believes the galaxy has become less peaceful and more chaotic since the fall of the Empire, and that the violence and oppression brought about by Imperial rule are justified by the order that the Empire provides.
He claims that Imperial rule is the ideal form of government when judged by any metric, including "safety, prosperity, trade opportunity, (and) peace".
The Client's costume includes a medal with the Imperial insignia worn around his neck, further signifying both his reverence for the Empire and his personal history with it.

==
Portrayal ==
The Client is portrayed in The Mandalorian by German film director, screenwriter, and actor Werner Herzog.
He was recruited for the part by series creator and showrunner Jon Favreau.
Herzog believed Favreau approached him out of appreciation for his acting abilities, and also because Favreau saw a "kindred spirit" in him.
Herzog said: "I think it's a bit of an homage to my films and to my storytelling and to my way of putting emphasis on world stories, fever dreams in the jungle, quasi-science fiction stories."
Herzog also believed Favreau wanted him because "they needed somebody who would spread terror, and be frightening for the audience", which he felt he could do.
It took Herzog less than one minute after meeting Favreau to be drawn to the project, later saying of the conversation: "I saw the universe.
I saw costumes.
I saw the round horizon.
I saw the spacecraft.
I saw an entire universe.
And I knew this was really big."
However, he requested full screenplays from The Mandalorian before formally accepting the role.
After reading them, he felt the part "looked good
and
interesting".
Herzog accepted the role in part to help fund a film he was writing and directing called Family Romance, LLC (2019), which he financed himself after struggling to find traditional Hollywood financing.
At the time he accepted the part on The Mandalorian, Herzog was not familiar with any other films Favreau had previously made, nor had he before seen any Star Wars films.
He said of the franchise: "I've seen some trailers, I've seen some excerpts here and there.
I know about the whole franchise and about the toys for the kids."
Herzog was briefed about the franchise and its storyline by Favreau and members of the crew.
He felt his lack of familiarity with Star Wars had no impact on his performance, saying "I knew what was expected of me.
I knew the interior landscape of the character
and I knew the exterior landscape."
Herzog believed portraying the Client was similar to his performance as the antagonist in the action thriller film Jack Reacher (2012).Rumors about Herzog's role on The Mandalorian first surfaced on the Internet in October 2018.
His casting was formally announced on December 12, 2018.
Footage of The Client was first publicly unveiled at the Star Wars Celebration convention in Chicago on April 14, 2019, during which the entirety of his first scene in the premiere episode was shown.
The Client was also featured prominently in the first official trailer for The Mandalorian, released on August 23, 2019, where he was the only character with a speaking role.
Much of Herzog's dialogue was also utilized as voice-over narration for a second Mandalorian trailer released on October 28, 2019.

==
Filming ==
Herzog said he "enjoyed every single moment" of his experience filming The Mandalorian.
He said that he has assumed previous Star Wars films were shot with a great deal of "motion-controlled cameras and green screens", but that The Mandalorian was a much more genuine and authentic filmmaking experience.
He said of the process: "Filmmaking — and that's Jon's great achievement with The Mandalorian —
is brought back to where it always has been".
With its use of real-time rendering, virtual reality, and visual effects that displayed digitally-augmented environments during the filming process itself, Herzog said The Mandalorian allows the actors "see the entire universe in which they are operating".
He said of the series: "It's cinema back at its best.
"Deborah
Chow, the director of both "Chapter 3: The Sin" and "Chapter 7:
The Reckoning", said she normally tries to approach working with each actor the same way and not treat any differently from any other, but that "Werner is special".
Herzog particularly enjoyed filming scenes with the animatronic puppet of Child character, which he called "heartbreakingly beautiful".
Chow said directing the scene between Herzog and the Child was "one of the weirdest" moments of her career, because he had so much affection for the puppet and was interacting with it like it was a living being.
She said: "I literally think that he had forgotten that it's not a real-live creature
and he had fallen in love with it."
Chow added: "You can't come up with a better matchup than Werner Herzog and Baby Yoda", a reference to the Child's popular nickname among fans and reviewers.
Herzog strongly urged the Mandalorian filmmakers to use the puppet for the character and not computer-generated imagery.
Favreau and executive producer Dave Filoni shot scenes for the Child both with and without the puppet, so they could replace the character with a CGI effect in post-production if the puppet did not look satisfactory.
After Herzog filmed a scene with the Child, Filoni began to remove the puppet to shoot another alternate scene without him, but Herzog urged him not to do so and to remain committed to the animatronics and puppetry, saying: "You are cowards.
Leave it.
Leave it.
"
When this story was later told to the public, some media reports mistakenly described it as if the producers of The Mandalorian were entirely replacing the Child puppet with a CGI creation altogether until Herzog convinced them otherwise.
Carl Weathers, the actor who portrayed Greef Karga, said that although his character's personality was normally self-assured, he deliberately made him act more cautious and nervous in his scenes with Herzog in order to convey that the Client was a dangerous man.
Weathers was a great admirer of Herzog, referring to him as "maestro" on the set of The Mandalorian, and the two had extensive conversations with each other about Herzog's past films and his relationship with actor Klaus Kinski.

== Reception ==
The Client character and Werner Herzog's performance have received generally positive reviews from critics.
Nick Venable of CinemaBlend said the character "was a scene-stealer from the start" and that he wished he had been featured more prominently in the season.
John Serba of Decider.com called Herzog a significant casting coup for The Mandalorian, and said the Client's "steely, dread-drenched, multi-layered, gravely philosophical dialogue" seemed specifically tailored for him.
Serba praised the actor's performance, writing: "He delivers the heft with a deeply furrowed glower, and we feel it in our marrow."
Scott Snowden of Space.com described Herzog as "magnificent" in delivering the Client's monologues.
/Film
writer Ethan Anderton said Herzog "makes the perfect crime boss" and has a "unique cadence and screen presence" which made him a good fit for The Mandalorian, which sought to explore a darker side of Star Wars.
Likewise, Dazed writer Thom Waite said Herzog's "menacing presence" fits in well with the darker tone that The Mandalorian attempts to set for the Star Wars franchise.
Will Thorne of Variety praised Herzog's performance and described several lines of the character's dialogue as "gems".
In an article headline "Werner Herzog's The Mandalorian Character Is The Next Great Star Wars Villain", Gretchen Smail of Bustle complimented Herzog's performance and called his casting "the best sign that you can expect the unexpected in The Mandalorian".
Meghan Kirby of Entertainment Weekly wrote: "Everything about Herzog’s character is unnerving and it's great."
The Client ranked tenth on a Screen Rant list of the most interesting characters from the first season of The Mandalorian.
The Nerdist Podcast created a three-minute YouTube video re-imagining The Mandalorian as if it were a documentary directed by Herzog, which included voice-over narration with a parody of Herzog's voice and persona.

==
Merchandise ==
A Funko Pop figurine of the Client was announced on December 31, 2019.
James Whitbrook of Gizmodo announced the release of the toy in a story with the headline "Forget the Baby Yoda, It's the Werner Herzog Funko Pop
I Want", and wrote: "Nothing — nothing — can compare to the absurd brilliance of living in the reality where Funko Pop Werner Herzog is a Thing that Now Exists."
Conversely, Vice writer Drew Schwartz wrote: "As strange as it is to see Werner Herzog transformed into a cute, plastic figurine with a giant head and a tiny body, it's even stranger to imagine who the hell would ever want to buy that figurine.
But these people exist."

==
References ==


===
Citations ===


===
Works cited ===
Weathers, Carl; Breznican, Anthony (November 12, 2019). "
Still Watching: The Mandalorian — "Chapter One" with Jon Favreau and Carl Weathers" (Podcast).
Vanity Fair.
Retrieved January 29, 2020.

==
External links ==
The Client on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Poe Dameron is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise.
Introduced in the 2015 film Star Wars: The Force Awakens, he is portrayed by Oscar Isaac.
Poe is an X-wing fighter pilot for the Resistance who inadvertently brings renegade stormtrooper Finn (John Boyega) and Jakku scavenger Rey (Daisy Ridley) into battle against the sinister First Order.
The character is featured in The Force Awakens media and merchandising as well as an eponymous comic book series.
He returns in the film's sequels The Last Jedi (2017) and The Rise of Skywalker (2019), and the animated series Star Wars Resistance.
Isaac's performance and the character have received positive reviews, with Poe being compared to the characterization of Han Solo (Harrison Ford) in the original Star Wars film trilogy.

==
Character ==


===
Concept ===
During the development phase of The Force Awakens, the character was initially referred to as "John Doe" and was first intended to be Jedi-like, and then a bounty hunter with a Wookiee sidekick.
This was dropped and instead Han Solo and Chewbacca were included in the story.
When Oscar Isaac was offered the role, Poe was supposed to die early in The Force Awakens.
When Isaac accepted the role, writer/director J. J. Abrams said he had changed his mind, stating, "I've figured it out.
You're in the whole movie now."
===
Portrayal ===
Isaac's casting in the film was first announced on April 29, 2014.
His character was first seen in the 88-second
The Force Awakens teaser trailer released by Lucasfilm on November 28, 2014, piloting an X-wing fighter.
The name Poe Dameron was revealed by Entertainment Weekly in a Lucasfilm-designed Topps-style trading card mockup in December 2014.
The character was one of those featured in a May 2015 Vanity Fair photo shoot by Annie Leibovitz.
He was named after  J. J. Abrams' assistant Morgan Dameron, who later went on to direct her own feature films.
Comedic lines of Poe's in The Force Awakens (like those during his interrogation by Kylo Ren) were added in reshoots, and some were improvised by Isaac.
The film has received praise for its diverse casting, including Isaac, who is Guatemalan-American.
Peter Travers of Rolling Stone wrote that "giving starring roles to a black man, a white woman and a Latino is ... quietly history making".
Targeted at Spanish-speaking viewers, an action-oriented Univision TV spot heavily featuring Poe included an introduction by Isaac in Spanish.
After an initial release of promotional character posters in November 2015, a poster featuring Isaac's Poe was released the following month.

===
Description ===
In The Force Awakens, Poe is a skilled X-wing fighter pilot for the Resistance.
The son of Rebel Alliance fighters, he is a commander in the Resistance’s Starfighter Corps and "one of Leia Organa's most-trusted operatives" who is headstrong and "can fly anything".
Isaac described Poe as "the best freaking pilot in the galaxy...
He's been sent on a mission by a certain princess, and he ends up coming up across [Finn], and their fates are forever intertwined.
"Natalie
Zutter and Chris Lough of Tor.com wrote, "Poe is that rare creature who knows exactly what he wants to do with his life."
Isaac said of the character in 2015, "Poe's the kind of guy you want in the trenches with you.
He’s straightforward
, he’s honest, he's incredibly loyal
and he’s got some swagger to him."
Katy Waldman wrote for Slate, "This is Poe Dameron, star pilot, heartthrob, wiseass, ace leather jacket–bestower, Finn’s OTP.
When he grins up at [Kylo Ren], all rakish charm and derring-do, we know the movie will be OK."
Comic book writer Charles Soule, creator of the 2015 Marvel Comics series Star Wars: Poe Dameron, said of the character, "I think it's his charisma that really defines him, for me.
Poe Dameron is one charming fellow.
We've seen great pilots before, and great warriors, but his ability to lead and inspire feels pretty fresh to me, as is his somewhat snappy roguishness."
Alex Segura, author of Star Wars Poe Dameron: Free Fall, said of Poe, "I love the complexities of the character—
he's charming, a bit of a scoundrel, not afraid to bend the rules—but he's also driven by loyalty and legacy, and friendship.
He's a hero, but in a world where there is absolute good and absolute evil, Poe is a bit gray."
Addressing Poe's early life as explored in Free Fall, Segura said:

Poe feels a lot of responsibility—to his parents’ legacy, mainly—and that doesn't always mix well with his own youthful curiosity and desire for adventure.
It's the core of Poe's conflict, as he leaves home and sets out on this big adventure—he has to basically see everything through the prism of what his parents would want him to do, and I feel like that's a really universal idea—
that we're often trying to square the things with the idea of what’s expected of us, and we eventually learn that we have to create our own set of rules while still honoring what came before.

After filming The Last Jedi but before its release, Isaac said in 2017:
Poe is in some ways a surrogate son for Leia.
But also I think she sees in him the potential for a truly great leader of the Resistance and beyond ...
Poe's arc is one of evolving from a heroic soldier to a seasoned leader, to see beyond the single-mindedness of winning the battle to the larger picture of the future of the galaxy.
[
Leia], with tough love, wants to push Poe to be more than the badass pilot, to temper his heroic impulses with wisdom and clarity.

==
Appearances ==


===
Films ===


====
The Force Awakens (2015) ====
Poe Dameron is the decorated star pilot of General Leia Organa's (Carrie Fisher) Resistance fleet, and the robot BB-8 is his astromech droid.
He is sent by Leia on a mission to the planet Jakku to retrieve part of a map that will lead to the location of her brother, Luke Skywalker (Mark Hamill).
Before Poe can leave with the map, the First Order attacks and he is captured.
The pilot has entrusted the map to BB-8, who flees into the desert as First Order Commander Kylo Ren (Adam Driver) tortures Poe in search of the map.
Poe is saved by the renegade stormtrooper Finn (John Boyega), and they escape in a TIE fighter.
They crash on Jakku; Finn is ejected from the ship and Poe is presumed dead as the destroyed craft is sucked under the sand.
Poe later reappears, having also been thrown from the crash, now leading a squadron of X-wing pilots in an assault on the First Order at Maz Kanata's (Lupita Nyong’o) castle.
He later leads his squadron to attack the First Order's Starkiller Base, and personally fires the shots that cause the superweapon to explode.

The 2015 novelization of The Force Awakens by Alan Dean Foster explains that Poe regains consciousness and is able to crash land the TIE fighter in the desert.
Thrown from the wreckage, he comes upon the Blarina scavenger Naka Iit.
Poe helps Naka outrun a team of pirates, and in turn Naka helps Poe get to Blowback Town.
====
The Last Jedi (2017) ====
Shortly after the destruction of Starkiller Base, the Resistance evacuates their base on D'Qar as the First Order closes in.
Poe leads a counterattack on the First Order to give the last Resistance fighters more time board the transports.
When they do so, Leia orders Poe to pull back, but he insists that they seize the opportunity to destroy one of the First Order's Dreadnoughts, and calls in a team of bombers.
While they are successful in taking out the ship, all of the bombers are destroyed and their crews killed, and Leia demotes Poe to captain for his recklessness and unwillingness to follow orders.
The First Order soon attacks again, having tracked the Resistance through lightspeed, a feat previously believed to have been impossible.
The attack claims the lives of nearly all of the Resistance's leadership and renders Leia unconscious.
While Poe assumes that he will become the acting general, Leia is instead replaced by Vice Admiral Holdo (Laura Dern), who dismisses his suggestions due to his earlier reckless actions.
Poe concocts a plan with Finn and mechanic Rose Tico (Kelly Marie Tran) to disable the First Order's tracker from within their lead Star Destroyer, but keeps the operation a secret from Holdo.
Discovering that Holdo's plan is to have the Resistance forces abandon their vulnerable cruiser, Poe stages a mutiny.
Finn, Rose, and BB-8 fail to disable the tracker, and an awakened Leia stops Poe's mutiny and resumes command though both Leia and Holdo express respect for Poe's daring.
Leia later reveals to Poe that Holdo's plan was always to use the cruiser to draw the First Order off while the transports escaped undetected.
The transports take the Resistance forces to an abandoned base on the planet Crait, where they transmit a distress signal to their allies.
Poe leads an offensive against the invading First Order, but is unable to stop their assault.
As Luke faces off against Ren, Poe leads the remaining members of the Resistance to escape through an uncharted passage.
He is among those who flee with Rey (Daisy Ridley) on the Millennium Falcon.

In an early version of the script, Poe accompanies Finn to Canto Bight, but writer/director Rian Johnson found the storyline flat when he realized their dialogue was interchangeable.
This led to the creation of the character Rose Tico, who would challenge and contrast with Finn.

====
The Rise of Skywalker (2019) ====
A year later, Poe, along with Finn and Chewbacca (Joonas Suotamo), go to retrieve information about Kylo Ren from a First Order mole.
He then goes to Passanna with Rey, Finn, BB-8, Chewbacca, and C-3PO
(Anthony Daniels)
to meet with one of Luke’s contacts, purported to know about a Sith dagger that is connected to the resurrection of Emperor Palpatine (Ian McDiarmid), revealed to be the real power behind the First Order.
This contact turns out to be Lando Calrissian (Billy Dee Williams), who along with the group is located and chased by the First Order, only just managing to evade them.
After Chewbacca’s apparent death, they head to Kijimi and meet up with Zorii Bliss (Keri Russell), a former crew member who helps them reach a black market droidsmith who will assist them in translating the language on the Sith dagger.
They get help from Babu Frik (Shirley Henderson) to help C-3PO translate the language, but at the cost of his memories.

On Kijimi, Poe's backstory is explored: Zorii reveals that he used to be a spice runner and abandoned his friends and crew when he decided to fly for the Resistance.
Zorii still maintains much resentment toward Poe for having left and nearly kills him upon meeting him again in Kijimi, but decides to help when Rey defeats her in combat.
Zorii, reconnecting with Poe, tells him that she plans to travel the galaxy, and invites Poe to join her.
Poe, whose faith in the Resistance has been shaken by the lack of support they have received since the Battle of Crait, considers going along with her, but Zorii ultimately urges him to finish what the Resistance has started.
She helps him to board the Resurgent-class Star Destroyer Steadfast to rescue Chewbacca, whom he learns is still alive.
While attempting to rescue Chewbacca, Poe and Finn are captured and set to be executed by General Hux (Domnhall Gleeson); Hux, however, lets them go when he reveals that he is the mole, supporting their cause to undermine Ren.
They subsequently rescue Rey and Chewbacca aboard the Millennium Falcon and leave for Kef Bir, the ocean moon of Endor, where the remains of the second Death Star lie.
While there, Poe displays a lack of concern for Rey's wellbeing, prompting Finn to reprimand him for his poor leadership skills in comparison to Leia.

Rey leaves Endor following her confrontation with Ren, leaving Poe, Finn, and new ally Jannah (Naomi Ackie) to return to the Resistance base.
There, they learn that Leia has died, having made Poe Acting General before becoming one with the Force.
Poe is deeply shaken and nervous about the pressure of leading the Resistance, but receives guidance from Lando, who shares that he was able to survive because of his reliance on his friends.
Poe makes Finn his co-general and, upon learning the location of Exegol, gives a rousing speech to the rest of the Resistance that they have a cause that the rest of the galaxy believes in, and that good people will fight as long as they are able to lead them.
Asking Lando to recruit Resistance allies throughout the galaxy, Poe leads a major strike against the Sith Eternal forces.
Despite the initial successes of the attack, the Sith fleet seems to be more than the Resistance can take and, upon the death of Poe's friend Snap Wexley (Greg Grunberg), Poe begins to believe that his efforts have been futile.
However, Lando soon arrives with a major fleet of supporters throughout the galaxy, including Zorii and Wedge Antilles (Denis Lawson).
With the help of these supporters, as well as the deaths of Ren and Palpatine, the Resistance is able to secure their victory against the remaining forces of the Sith Eternal.
Back at the Resistance base, Poe shares a final moment with Zorii, and reunites with Finn and Rey in an emotional victory celebration.

===
Literature ===
Poe also appears in multiple Star Wars novels and comic books, in particular the Journey to Star Wars line, introduced to connect the Star Wars sequel trilogy with previous film installments.

====
Novels ====
Poe is first mentioned in the young adult novel Moving Target:
A Princess Leia Adventure (2015) by Cecil Castellucci and Jason Fry, set between The Empire Strikes Back (1980) and Return of the Jedi (1983).
Poe is featured in Star Wars: Before the Awakening (2015) by Greg Rucka, an anthology book for young readers about the lives of Poe, Rey and Finn before the events of The Force Awakens.
Star Wars:
Resistance Reborn (2019) by Rebecca Roanhorse, covers the rebuilding of the Resistance after the events of The Last Jedi.
Star Wars Poe Dameron:
Free Fall by Alex Segura is scheduled to be released on August 4, 2020, and will explore Poe's early life and connection to Zorii Bliss.
Poe also features prominently in the novelizations of the sequel trilogy films.

====
Comics ====
Yavin 4, the moon on which the Rebel base was located in the 1977 film Star Wars, was established as Poe's homeworld in the comic series Star Wars: Shattered Empire (2015)
after the Guatemalan-born Isaac learned that the shooting location for Yavin 4 had been Tikal, Guatemala.
The Shattered Empire series features Poe's parents, members of the Rebel Alliance: his mother is Shara Bey, an A-wing pilot who adventures with Leia, and his father is Kes Dameron, part of a special ground force known as the Pathfinders who are led by Han Solo.
A Marvel comic book series titled Star Wars: Poe Dameron, written by Charles Soule and illustrated by Phil Noto, was published between April 2016 and September 2018.
The events of the series take place shortly before The Force Awakens.

===
Television ===
Poe appears in the 2018 animated TV series Star Wars Resistance, voiced by Isaac.
The Lego versions of Poe and BB-8 also appear in the 2016 short form animated series Lego Star Wars: The Resistance Rises, voiced by Lex Lang, and the short Poe Dameron vs the First Order Snowspeeder.
===
Video games ===
Poe is a playable character in the 2015 Force Awakens add-on to the Disney Infinity 3.0 video game, with an Infinity character figurine available separately.
He is also a playable character in the video games
Star Wars: Galaxy of Heroes (2015),
Lego Star Wars:
The Force Awakens (2016) and Star Wars: Force Arena (2017).

He was also planned to appear in the cancelled mobile game Star Wars: Rivals.

His personal X-Wing starfighter is playable in Star Wars: Battlefront II, the sequel to its 2015 reboot.

===
Merchandising ===
Hasbro has released a 3.75 inch Poe Dameron action figure, and a 6 inch figure in their Black Series line.
Funko has produced three Poe Dameron figures as part of their POP!
Television line of 4.5 inch vinyl figures in the Japanese super deformed style.
The first features the character in his flight suit, helmet, and goggles; the second is a Hot Topic-exclusive version in Poe's leather jacket
look from the beginning of the film; and a third is an f.y.e.-exclusive version in an orange First Order "prisoner suit" and facial cut.
Poe and BB-8 are featured in a Lego Star Wars playset called Poe's X-wing Fighter, and Poe is available as a Lego Buildable Figure.
Hasbro released a wearable replica of Poe's helmet as part of its Star Wars: The Black Series line in 2017.

===
Theme parks ===
Poe Dameron appears in the theme park attractions Star Tours –
The Adventures Continue and Star Wars:
Rise of the Resistance, with Isaac reprising the role in each instance.

== Reception ==
The character and Isaac's portrayal have received positive reviews.
Michael Phillips of the Chicago Tribune wrote, "Oscar Isaac is a primary asset as Poe Dameron ...
Like Ford's Han Solo in the original three, he's the guy you want on your team, the one who doesn't take any guff".
Robbie Collin of The Telegraph called Poe "a dashing, dry-humoured swashbuckler—
in short, he’s like Han Solo was 40 years ago".
Todd McCarthy of The Hollywood Reporter described the "hotshot" pilot as "a man very much in the Solo mold", and Manohla Dargis of The New York Times wrote that Poe "suggests a next-generation Han".
Richard Roeper of the Chicago Sun-Times noted that "Isaac has more than a bit of Han Solo swagger", and Ann Hornaday of The Washington Post said that "Isaac brings just the right amount of cocksure street smarts to his role".
Brian Hiatt of Rolling Stone wrote that Poe's "loose, jazzy dialogue was the first, highly welcome clue that these new films would be more human in tone than George Lucas' prequels.
"
The Telegraph also listed Poe's scenes as one of their "14 things
Star Wars fans will love about The Force Awakens", writing that they "spark and fizz with energy" and that "while Han Solo will always hold the number one spot, Oscar Isaac’s Poe Dameron is definitely a serious contender for the title of Second Coolest Man in the Galaxy".
Peter Travers of Rolling Stone wrote that "Isaac oozes flyboy charm".
Alex Brown of Tor.com called Poe "the greatest addition to Star Wars canon since Mara Jade",
a popular character from the Star Wars expanded universe.
Some critics believed that the revelation in The Rise of Skywalker that Poe spent time as a spice smuggler in his youth did not fit with what audiences already knew about the character from his film, television, novel, and comics appearances.
Both Joanna Robinson of Vanity Fair and Scott Mendelson of Forbes noted the chemistry between Poe and Finn (John Boyega), with Brian Truitt of USA Today calling the relationship a "bromance".
Their scenes in the film, and Isaac's own comments during an interview with Ellen DeGeneres, have sparked fan and journalistic speculation that Poe could be gay, or be developed as such in future films.
Several media outlets reported the wave of fan fiction and fan art created by fan "shippers", or those with a desire to see Poe and Finn in a romantic relationship.
Commenting on Isaac's camaraderie with his The Force Awakens cast members, Robinson wrote that "the most important bond Isaac established was with John Boyega.
Theirs is a flirtation that launched a thousand pieces of fan fiction."
Despite fan support and Isaac's push for a romantic relationship between the characters, such a direction was not pursued in The Rise of Skywalker.
Film editor Maryann Brandon, who worked on both The Force Awakens and The Rise of Skywalker, said she did not see a romance develop between the two characters in the footage for the films, noting that she was "not reading as much into it as an audience."
Brandon described the characters as the "best of friends.
There is a kind of brotherhood there where they understand each other, and they've got each other's back."
==
References ==


==
External links ==
Poe Dameron in the StarWars.com Databank
Poe Dameron on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Poe Dameron on IMDb
Finn (Designation FN-2187) is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise.

The character first appeared in the 2015 film Star Wars:
The Force Awakens as a First Order stormtrooper who, shocked by the Order's cruelty in his first combat mission, flees and joins forces with Rey and later the Resistance.
He is portrayed by English actor John Boyega, who reprised the role in Star Wars: The Last Jedi and Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker.
Boyega's performance and the character have received praise.
For his performance in The Force Awakens, Boyega won the BAFTA Rising Star Award, and was nominated for the Saturn Award for Best Actor.

==
Casting and creation ==
The idea for the character, whose name during early pre-production was Sam, came from screenwriter Lawrence Kasdan.
Colleague Michael Arndt, who prepared an early draft of The Force Awakens, said:
And then we were struggling to figure out who the male lead was going to be.
I remember we talked about pirates and merchant marines and all this stuff, and finally Larry [Kasdan] got pissed at all of us
and he's just like, "
You guys, you're not thinking big.
What if he's a stormtrooper that ran away?"

For the roles of Finn and other new Star Wars characters for The Force Awakens, director J. J. Abrams intentionally looked for unknown actors, as he wanted audiences "to meet these characters [in the film] and not feel like it’s him from that thing
, it’s her from that thing.
"
Boyega, who had impressed Abrams in his debut role in British sci-fi film Attack the Block (2011), was invited to audition for the role of Finn, a process which lasted seven months before he was finally cast.
Kathleen Kennedy, one of the producers of The Force Awakens, stated: John Boyega was somebody we'd known of because of Attack the Block.
And we'd been sort of putting him on the top of our list right from the beginning.
But, then again, we went on a massive search just to see who was out there, and we kept coming back to realizing that John would be the perfect Finn.

Finn's stormtrooper code name, FN-2187, is a reference to the number of the cell in which Princess Leia was detained in the original 1977 film Star Wars. "
Cell 2187", in turn, references Arthur Lipsett's short film 21-87.Abrams stated that it was intentional that Finn was given no last name in promotional materials for The Force Awakens, suggesting that his full name and background would be revealed in future films.
However, the film itself revealed that "Finn" is an adopted name, derived from his stormtrooper number.

In 2021 whilst promoting the film Cherry, Marvel Cinematic Universe actor Tom Holland revealed he had also auditioned for the role of Finn before Boyega was cast.

==
Appearances ==


===
The Force Awakens ===
Finn, originally designated "FN-2187", is an ex-First Order stormtrooper who served under Captain Phasma (Gwendoline Christie) and Kylo Ren (Adam Driver).
He was taken from his family at a young age and sold to the First Order to become a part of their ever-expanding army.
He was trained for most his life to be an effective, loyal, and merciless soldier.

In spite of his training, Finn becomes disillusioned with the First Order during his first combat mission on the planet Jakku.
He is traumatized when a fellow stormtrooper dies in front of him, and is later horrified when Ren, having failed to secure the map that will lead to the missing Luke Skywalker (Mark Hamill), orders his squadron to massacre a village of Jakku civilians.
The other stormtroopers follow Ren's order without hesitation.
Finn, however, lowers his weapon, aghast, in a silent but firm refusal.
While on Jakku, Phasma and Ren both notice Finn's inability to kill, and Phasma later instructs him to report for reconditioning to better follow her orders.
Instead of heeding her word, Finn resolves to flee the First Order, and convinces the captured Resistance pilot Poe Dameron (Oscar Isaac) to aid him in his escape.

With Poe piloting a stolen TIE fighter, the two escape from aboard the Finalizer—the Resurgent-class Star Destroyer where Poe was being held prisoner.
While piloting, Poe dubs FN-2187 "Finn" (from the "FN" in his designation), which the otherwise nameless stormtrooper embraces.
Moments after, their TIE fighter is shot down by the Finalizer's turrets and crash-lands back on Jakku.
When Finn comes to, he searches for Poe in the wreckage, but is only able to find the pilot's jacket before the shattered hull of their ship is swallowed by an enormous sinkhole.
Finn assumes that Poe is dead.
Alone, Finn decides to search for civilization, and dons Poe's jacket in place of his own stormtrooper armor.

Poe's astromech droid BB-8, now in the care of the junk scavenger Rey (Daisy Ridley), recognizes the jacket that Finn is wearing belongs to Poe.
Rey assumes Finn to be a member of the Resistance after mentioning that BB-8 has a partially completed map leading to Luke.
Finn goes along with her mistaken assumption, hoping that she will help him get BB-8 to the Resistance.
The three of them escape the First Order on the Millennium Falcon with help from Han Solo (Harrison Ford) and Chewbacca (Peter Mayhew).
Han takes them to his friend Maz Kanata (Lupita Nyong’o) on Takodana, who promises to take them to the Resistance.
Finn decides to continue to flee the galactic conflict, but changes his mind when the First Order launches a preemptive strike on the capital of the New Republic and Ren's forces find them and take Rey prisoner.

Finn flies to the Resistance base, where he discovers that Poe is still alive and meets General Leia Organa (Carrie Fisher), C-3PO (Anthony Daniels), and the hibernating R2-D2 (Kenny Baker).
Finn reveals some details about the First Order's superweapon, Starkiller Base, and claims to be able to disable their shields.
When he arrives on the planet with Han and Chewbacca, however, Finn reveals that he only worked in the base's sanitation section.
Nevertheless, the team takes Phasma hostage and Finn forces her at gunpoint to disable the shields.
This allows the Resistance to attack, led by Poe.
They meet up with Rey, who has freed herself from captivity.
Later, Finn watches in horror with the others as Ren kills Han.
Ren confronts Finn and Rey in the woods, claiming that their fight is not over.
Finn picks up Luke’s old lightsaber after Rey is knocked out by Ren and tries to fight him, but Ren easily overpowers him and knocks him unconscious.
Rey stops Ren from killing Finn, and she and Chewbacca escape Starkiller Base in the Millennium Falcon and bring the comatose Finn to the Resistance base for medical care.

==== Related works and merchandising ====
Finn is featured in Star Wars: Before the Awakening (2015) by Greg Rucka, an anthology book for young readers that focuses on the lives of Poe, Rey and Finn before the events of The Force Awakens.
Finn is also a point of view character in the 2015 novelization of The Force Awakens by Alan Dean Foster.
Finn is a playable character in Disney Infinity 3.0, voiced by Boyega.

===
The Last Jedi ===
Finn awakens from his coma aboard the main Resistance cruiser, and immediately demands to know where Rey is, learning that Leia has a beacon that will lead Rey back to her when necessary.
Later, following the attack on the cruiser that killed most of the Resistance's main leadership and rendered Leia unconscious, Finn takes the beacon and attempts to board an escape pod in the hopes of keeping both himself and Rey out of danger.
Before he can board the pod, he is found by Rose Tico (Kelly Marie Tran), a maintenance worker whose sister Paige, a bomber for the Resistance, has recently died in an attack on the First Order.
Seeing Finn trying to escape, Rose stuns him and intends to turn him in for desertion, but stops when Finn tells her that the First Order has found a way to track the cruiser through lightspeed.
She tells Finn that she might be able to disable the tracker, and Finn says that, having worked aboard a Star Destroyer, he would be able to find where the tracker is.
Rose and Finn run their plan by Poe, who contacts Kanata for help, but she claims that she is too busy and instructs them to find a "master code breaker" on a casino on the planet Canto Bight.
Operating against acting Resistance leader Vice Admiral Holdo’s
(Laura Dern) wishes, Finn and Rose, along with BB-8, steal a ship and go to Canto Bight.

Finn is initially entranced by the lavish lifestyle of the casino, but becomes disillusioned when Rose tells him that most of the people there have become wealthy by dealing arms to the First Order.
While they find the master code breaker, they are unable to recruit him as they are arrested and jailed for a parking violation.
In their cell they meet DJ (Benicio Del Toro), a thief and codebreaker who offers to help them; they refuse, but he nonetheless breaks them out of their cell.
Finn and Rose escape from the prison, where they set free a horde of horse-like racing creatures called Fathiers, escaping atop one of them.
Outside the casino they are greeted by BB-8 and DJ, having stolen a ship together.
DJ agrees to help them, despite Finn’s misgivings.
Eventually, Finn, Rose, and DJ arrive aboard the Mega-class Star Dreadnought Supremacy and disguise themselves as First Order officers; Finn finds the location of the tracker and DJ breaks them in, but before Rose is able to disable the tracker they are caught by Phasma.
Upon being captured, DJ, having overheard the Resistance's plan of escaping to Crait via transports, secretly tells the First Order of the plans in exchange for money and his freedom, and Finn and Rose are to be executed.
Before they are, Holdo rams the Resistance cruiser into Supreme Leader Snoke’s
(Andy Serkis) flagship at lightspeed, damaging the ship and sending it into chaos.
Finn has a one-on-one fight with Phasma, ending with him proudly declaring himself "rebel scum" before Phasma falls to her demise.
BB-8, aboard a First Order AT-ST, rescues Finn and Rose from Stormtroopers and the three of them very narrowly escape to Crait aboard a damaged shuttle.

As the First Order prepares an attack on the formerly abandoned Rebel base on Crait, Finn recognizes the weaponry that they plan to use to destroy the blast doors and leads a small strike on the First Order with the intention of disabling the cannon.
The attack goes poorly, and Poe orders all fighters to retreat, but Finn is determined to destroy the cannon and flies directly into the blast, planning to sacrifice himself to defeat the First Order.
At the last second, Rose stops him by ramming her speeder into his, pushing him out of the blast.
Finn asks her why she stopped him, and she tells him that wars are won "not by fighting what we hate, but saving what we love;" she then kisses him before falling unconscious.
Finn brings her body back to the Rebel base and summons a medic for her.
When Luke appears on Crait, Finn's first instinct is to send forces to help him, but Poe realizes that Luke is stalling to give the Resistance time to escape.
Finn and Poe lead the Resistance off the planet.
Finn finally reunites with Rey, and embraces her before boarding the Millennium Falcon.
Finn is last seen putting a blanket over the still unconscious Rose.

====
Related works and merchandising ====
Finn is a playable Hero in Star Wars Battlefront II, voiced by Boyega.
He was added through the DLC of The Last Jedi.
Finn's outfit in The Rise of Skywalker update.
===
The Rise of Skywalker ===
Finn, along with Poe, intercepts a message from a First Order mole that Emperor Palpatine (Ian McDiarmid) has come back to life and is planning an attack on the Resistance and the New Republic in the form of the Final Order, a massive fleet of Xyston-class Star Destroyers designed by the Sith Eternal.
Finn then leaves along with Rey, Poe, C-3PO, and Chewbacca to the desert planet of Pasaana, where with the help of Lando Calrissian (Billy Dee Williams)
they locate a dagger that contains a clue to a Sith wayfinder, a compass to the Sith planet Exegol.
Throughout the whole journey, Finn clearly has something he wants to tell Rey, but is unable to find the time to tell her.
Their journey takes them to Kijimi, where the location of the wayfinder is extracted from C-3PO's memory files, and later to the Resurgent-class Star Destroyer Steadfast, where Finn and Poe go to rescue Chewbacca, who was taken by the First Order.
In the process, Finn and Poe are captured by Stormtroopers and set to be executed, but they are rescued by General Hux (Domnhall Gleeson), who reveals that he is the mole.
Going free, Finn and Poe rescue Rey aboard the Millennium Falcon and head to the Endor system, where the wayfinder is located among the wreckage of the second Death Star.

On Kef Bir, they encounter a group allied with the Resistance, led by a woman named Jannah (Naomi Ackie).
Finn gets to know Jannah, who reveals that she and the entire settlement on Kef Bir are former Stormtroopers who mutinied after a battle.
Finn tells her that he left the Order as well, and suggests that the Force brought them together and caused them all to leave the Order.
Finn and Jannah follow Rey aboard the wreckage to try and stop her from confronting Ren, but she does so and nearly kills him before healing him and leaving aboard Ren's ship.
Without Rey or the wayfinder, Finn, Poe, and Jannah return to the Resistance base, where they learn that Leia has died.
Poe is named Acting General, and Poe appoints Finn as Co-General.

Finn learns of Exegol's whereabouts based on Rey's transmissions, and he and Poe lead a strike against the Sith Eternal forces, with Finn and Jannah specifically leading a ground attack on the surface of the Steadfast to take out their navigation.
As the attack nears its end, Finn and Jannah are left on the surface of the damaged Resurgent Star Destroyer, but are ultimately rescued by Lando and Chewbacca in the Millennium Falcon and the rest of the Resistance fleet; Finn attributes his faith in his being rescued to a belief in the Force.
Following the successful attack, Finn celebrates among the Rebels on the Resistance base, reuniting with Rey and Poe.

===
The Lego Star Wars Holiday Special ===
Finn, having revealed what he was going to tell Rey to be of his own realization of being Force sensitive, is now training under her as her Jedi Padawan.
Rey accidentally hurts Finn's feelings during a training session, making Finn use a wooden toy lightsaber instead of her own.
Rey seeks out a path leading her to the World Between Worlds, allowing her to travel through time.
Meanwhile, Finn plans for Life Day celebrations with Poe, Jannah, Rose and Lando, as they await the arrival of Chewbacca's family.
During her travels, Rey learns from Yoda's ghost that patience and understanding is an important part of teaching a Padawan; Finn is shown to have prevented the Life Day tree from falling by using his wooden lightsaber.
When Rey returns home, she allows Finn to slice the Life Day roast with her lightsaber.
By mistake, Finn slices all the way through the table, but Rey reassures him that she'll help him get better.

==
Character ==
When asked about Finn's character traits, Boyega replied, I think the element of having to step up to a bigger calling, when your circumstances don't particularly reflect that.
Because I'm young, at the beginning of my life; you haven't really achieved much, and then you have to do that whole adulthood thing, get responsible,
work and all of that stuff, no more mommy and daddy taking care of things.
I feel like it's the same kind of journey that Finn has when he leaves the First Order.
He leaves a curriculum, he leaves a system and embarks on his own journey.
He also noted that initially "most of his decisions are based on adrenaline.
Like, 'Okay, you know what?
I'm just going to get this blaster and run away.'

" Boyega further noted that "[n]ot only is the character in over his head and someone who is just dropped into an extraordinary circumstance, the scenes and the script prove that
and it's not a problem that can just be erased.
"Finn was originally going to be accompanied to Canto Bight by Poe in The Last Jedi, but writer/director Rian Johnson found the storyline flat when he realized their dialogue was interchangeable.
This led to the creation of the character Rose Tico, who would challenge and contrast with Finn.
In The Rise of Skywalker, Finn tries to tell Rey something which he does not want to say in front of Poe, but this thread is never resolved within the film.
This was implied to involve him confessing he loved her, but Boyega denied this on Twitter.
The novelization of the film reveals that Finn is Force-sensitive, implying this to be what he intended to tell Rey.

== Reception ==
The character and Boyega's portrayal were praised; reviewer Jamie Graham wrote, "of the new triangle of characters, Boyega brings intensity and surprisingly honed comic timing."
Reviewers also praised Finn's relationships with the other characters: The dynamic between Rey and Finn is something new for Star Wars, with her bright-eyed heroism complementing Boyega's roguish wit...
Gone is the clunky dialogue of the prequels—instead, it's replaced by some seriously clever writing that often leads to nice little moments, many with Han and Finn.
Drew McWeeny of HitFix notes, "Boyega has this great combination of self-interested fear and reluctant heroism that he plays beautifully, and he charts Finn's evolution as a person expertly here."
Peter Travers of Rolling Stone described the character as "bracingly comic and cunning".
Robbie Collin writes that Boyega has a "(very funny) half-brave, half-anxious, would-be-heroic schtick" and notes that despite being "brave, charming, and funny", Finn "only wants to be thought of as the daring freedom-fighter
he's not quite sure he's cut out to be."
Some reviewers were less than positive, however.
Ty Burr of The Boston Globe wrote that "Boyega's Finn is the new movie's one weak link, a character who vacillates between noble impulses and cowardice until our interest drops away.
The performance is fine
but it's just fine, with little of the iconic bite a Wagnerian cartoon like this needs.
"The
character was also subject to racist reactions by some fans online, to which Boyega responded, "I'm not going to lose sleep over people."
After the first trailer premiered, Boyega responded to critics with, "To whom it may concern ...
Get used to it", and further commented that, "All the films I've done have had a secret commentary on stereotypical mentalities.
It's about getting people to drop a prejudiced state of mind and realise, 'Oh shit we're just watching normal people.'
"
In response to those who desired to boycott the film over their disagreements with the existence of a black stormtrooper, Boyega replied, "I'm proud of my heritage, and no man can take that away from me.
I wasn't raised to fear people with a difference of opinion.
They are merely victims of a disease in their mind.
"In
2016, Boyega was nominated for the Saturn Award for Best Actor for his portrayal of Finn.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Finn in the StarWars.com Databank
Finn on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Finn on IMDb
Vice-Admiral Amilyn Holdo is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise.
She is introduced in the 2017 Claudia Gray novel Star Wars: Leia, Princess of Alderaan as the childhood best friend of Princess Leia Organa.
Holdo and Leia first meet as teenagers when they are both enrolled in Coruscant's Apprentice Legislature, with Holdo subsequently becoming an important member of the Rebel Alliance.
Holdo reappears in the 2017 film Star Wars:
The Last Jedi, in which she is portrayed by Laura Dern as a member of Organa's Resistance, as well as a number of Star Wars comics.
Claudia Gray's version of the character has received high acclaim from critics and fans alike, with many comparing her to the character of Luna Lovegood from the Harry Potter series.
Rian Johnson's version in The Last Jedi has been generally well-received, particularly praising Laura Dern's performance as an older Holdo; however, some have criticized her characterization for being too different from her younger book counterpart.

==
Character ==
In Claudia Gray's novel and comic stories, Amilyn Holdo is depicted as an eccentric yet highly intelligent and competent member of the Rebel Alliance who is often underestimated because of her quirks.
She is knowledgeable of the esoteric and spiritual practices of her home planet Gatalenta, such as astrology and skyfaring (a type of meditation), and often speaks in riddles and strange metaphors.
(
Leia refers to her distinctive speech patterns as "Holdo speak".)
In terms of appearance, Holdo dyes her hair exotic colors, habitually going barefoot, and often dressing in flamboyant clothing.
Gray said:

She's somebody who's a bit off-kilter, who sees the world through a prism most others don't understand.
At first Leia thinks she's pleasant but weird, but as time goes on, it becomes apparent that there's much more to Holdo than you might guess when you first met her.
We don't really have a lot of true oddballs in Star Wars, so it was fun to introduce one!

The Last Jedi director Rian Johnson described the character to actress Laura Dern as "someone who is so steadfast that you don't know what side they're on because they don't need the rest of the world to know their plans.
"
Initially, the movie version of Holdo was intended to be very close to her description in the book, described by Johnson as "hippy-dippy"; Dern also compared Holdo to a hippie.
However, the director thought that Dern's portrayal was "too spacy", so her character's eccentricities were significantly toned down in the final version of the script.
In a 2018 interview, Dern revealed that Holdo is Force-sensitive.

==
Appearances ==


===
Leia, Princess of Alderaan ===
Holdo makes her first appearance as a teenage student of the Apprentice Legislature who befriends Leia during a Pathfinding class.
Subsequently, she learns about Leia's involvement in the Rebel Alliance, and aids her in her missions.
Most notably, Holdo helps Organa safely navigate to the Paucris system to warn the rebels about an impending attack by the Empire.

===
Comic series ===
Holdo appears in a number of Star Wars comic stories.
The Star Wars Adventures 25 story "The Right Wrong Turn" revisits Holdo and Organa's teenage friendship, with Amilyn asking Leia to teach her to drive a speeder as a pretext for visiting the dangerous lower levels of Coruscant.
In Age of Resistance Special 1 story "The Bridge", she assumes command of a Rebel Alliance starship after the captain is killed by an attacking Imperial warship, and saves the crew by making her "Holdo maneuver".
In Star Wars: Age of Resistance – Poe Dameron #1, Holdo runs a Resistance spy operation to steal the head of a protocol droid belonging to the New Republic.
She is confronted by Poe Dameron, who is at that time a New Republic pilot, but her identity as the thief is never revealed to him, which is why he does not recognize her in The Last Jedi.
===
The Last Jedi ===
By The Last Jedi, Holdo is the Vice-Admiral of the Resistance who temporarily assumes the position of the Supreme Commander while General Leia is in a coma after an attack by the First Order.
There is distrust and tension between Holdo and her subordinate Poe Dameron (since his reckless actions led to heavy casualties in the Resistance fleet), which eventually culminates in Dameron starting a mutiny against Holdo.
After Leia recovers from her injuries and suppresses the mutiny, Holdo has the remaining Resistance members (including Leia) evacuate to the planet Crait via transports while she stays on Leia's flagship, the Raddus.
When the First Order begins firing on the fleeing transports, Holdo jumps to hyperspace through Supreme Leader Snoke's flagship, the Supremacy, to defeat the First Order fleet in a suicide attack, which, by the time of The Rise of Skywalker, has been dubbed as the "Holdo maneuver".

== Reception ==
The book version of Holdo received critical acclaim, and readers compared her to Luna Lovegood from the Harry Potter series.
Her character was analyzed from a feminist perspective, with Valerie Estelle Frankel noting that Holdo possesses "a very different nonlinear [feminine] type of strength".
In regards to the movie version of Holdo, Arkady Martine wrote that "women who look like Holdo — femme fatales, even in their middle age, women who… like frivolous things, jewels and bright hair and makeup even in the darkest moments — we are primed to read women like that as women who will betray", and that this "old trope" is eventually subverted when Holdo turns out to be a skilled strategist with "impeccable military credentials" who sacrifices herself for the Resistance.
Caitlyn Busch described Dern's character as "a stern, beautiful female character who audiences have never seen before; she swoops in, takes control of the situation, and shames a favorite male character like he’s an insolent child".
However, critics also noted that the movie depiction of Holdo appears very dissimilar from the quirky book character created by Claudia Gray, and basically seems "like a different person".

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Amilyn Holdo in the StarWars.com Databank
Amilyn Holdo on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Amilyn Holdo on IMDb
Rose Tico is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise, first appearing in Star Wars:
The Last Jedi (2017).
A mechanic with the Resistance, she befriends Finn and works with him to try to help Resistance forces escape from the First Order.
Rose is portrayed by Kelly Marie Tran.

Rose was created by The Last Jedi writer and director Rian Johnson after he decided a subplot originally involving Finn and Poe Dameron needed a different dynamic.
The Last Jedi was Tran's first film role, and she had never watched a Star Wars film before auditioning for the part.
A struggling actress who had considered quitting the profession altogether before seeking the part, Tran went through an intense five-month audition process, beating out hundreds of other actresses for the role.

Rose's backstory was revealed in the novel Star Wars:
The Last Jedi: Cobalt Squadron (2017), in which Rose is the protagonist along with her sister Paige, a minor character in the film.
That novel establishes that Rose and Paige joined the Resistance after their impoverished home planet was devastated by the First Order.
The character of Rose serves as a relatable audience surrogate, an everywoman, a positive influence on Finn, and the personification of real-life Star Wars fandom.
Johnson originally planned for Rose to be sarcastic and irritable, but the character was changed to match Tran's personality after she was cast, becoming more positive.

Tran felt a connection between Rose's past experiences and those of Tran's own family during the Vietnam War, and Tran did research about the conflict and her family's past to help get into Rose's mindset.
The character and Tran's portrayal received largely positive reactions from critics and fans alike.
Some have praised Tran and the character for providing a positive role model for women of color.
Nevertheless, Tran became the subject of racist and sexist attacks over the Internet, which led her to permanently clear her Instagram account.
Multiple fans and celebrities have come to Tran's defense, and she directly responded to the attacks with an essay for The New York Times.
For her performance in The Last Jedi, Tran was nominated for the Saturn Award for Best Supporting Actress.

Rose returned in Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker (2019), the final installment in the sequel trilogy, in which she has risen in the ranks of the Resistance and has taken on a greater leadership role.
However, her role in the film was far smaller than in The Last Jedi, which became a major point of criticism among critics and fans alike.
Some accused the filmmakers of deliberately reducing Rose's role in response to the online harassment against Tran, which the film's co-writer Chris Terrio denied.

==
Appearances ==


===
Cobalt Squadron ===
Although Rose Tico was first conceived for the film Star Wars:
The Last Jedi (2017), her backstory is established in the middle-grade novel Star Wars:
The Last Jedi: Cobalt Squadron (2017), by Elizabeth Wein.
The novel and film were both released on December 15, 2017, and Cobalt Squadron is set just before and during the events of Star Wars:
The Force Awakens (2015), the first film in the Star Wars sequel trilogy.
Dialogue that referred to parts of the novel's backstory was included in the original The Last Jedi script, but was cut from the final film.
Rose is the primary protagonist of the novel along with her older sister, Paige Tico, who was portrayed by Veronica Ngo during a brief appearance in the film.
Although their parents are not featured as characters in the novel, the reference book Star Wars: The Last Jedi
: The Visual Dictionary establishes that the Tico sisters had a close relationship with their parents, Hue and Thanya, who raised them to have a strong sense of right and wrong.
Rose and Paige were raised on the planet Hays Minor, the impoverished mining planet in the Otomok star system far beyond the policing efforts of the New Republic government.
Hays Minor is one of the first places to be victimized by the First Order, an autocratic military dictatorship seeking to control the galaxy.
The First Order used the planet to test its weapons and kidnap children to indoctrinate as stormtroopers.
As a result, Rose developed a hatred of the First Order starting in her early childhood.
The Tico sisters join the Resistance, a paramilitary organization led by General Leia Organa fighting against the First Order.
The two work together on a bomber spacecraft called the Cobalt Hammer, where Paige is a gunner and Rose was a mechanical engineer.
Despite her lack of formal training, Rose receives the post due to her extensive mechanical knowledge.
Rose and Paige each wear matching medallions resembling the insignia of their home system of Otomok.
At the beginning of Cobalt Squadron, Rose and Paige are on a mission to testing new stealth technology when they encounter and rescue a fugitive fleeing from First Order TIE fighters.
They later learn the fugitives were from a planet in the Atterra System which, like Rose's and Paige's home planet, has been devastated by the First Order.
Leia authorizes a team of bombers, including Rose and Paige aboard the Cobalt Hammer, to gather reconnaissance in the Atterra System and run supplies to the citizens there.
Leia also asks Rose to devise a technique to allow the bombers to escape First Order detection, leading her to invent a device called a "baffler", which reduces the ship's ion emissions and makes its energy signature harder to detect, thus making the bombers more difficult for enemy sensors to locate.
Though they sustain casualties from First Order defenders, Rose and the team successfully deliver the supplies, and then escape.
Upon returning to the Resistance, they learn that the entire Hosnian star system, which had housed the capital of the New Republic, was destroyed by the First Order superweapon Starkiller Base, which itself was subsequently destroyed by the Resistance.
Rose and Paige prepare to assist with the evacuation of the Resistance base on the planet D’Qar, which leads directly into the events in the first scene of Star Wars: The Last Jedi.
As a result of the success of the Rose's baffler system, Vice Admiral Amilyn Holdo orders that it be adopted throughout the Resistance fleet.
===
The Last Jedi ===
In an early scene in Star Wars: The Last Jedi, Paige Tico is killed during the evacuation of D'Qar, after the Cobalt Hammer is destroyed during an operation in which Paige helps destroy the Mandator IV-class Siege Dreadnought Fulminatrix.
Rose mourns her sister's death aboard the MC85 Star Cruiser Raddus, a Resistance Mon Calamari cruiser.
She is guarding the escape pods against potential Resistance deserters when she finds Finn, a Resistance hero she greatly admires, attempting to flee in one of the pods.
After Rose stops him by stunning him with an electro-shock prod, Finn tells her the First Order had found a way to track the Raddus through hyperspace.
The two formulate a plan to disable the tracking device on the First Order's flagship, the Mega-class Star Dreadnought Supremacy, which will allow the Raddus to escape.
With help from Resistance droid BB-8, Rose and Finn set off on an unauthorized mission to the casino city of Canto Bight to find a master codebreaker to assist them.
Although Finn is impressed by the superficial beauty and debauchery of Canto Bight, Rose reveals to him the dark underpinnings of the lavish casino city, pointing out the fortunes of the city's rich inhabitants is supported by child slavery, weapons dealing, and other immoral activities that result in the suffering of others.
Rose and Finn are arrested for their illegal entry into Canto Bight, and in prison they met an unnamed slicer, who along with BB-8 helps them escape and agrees to assist them in disabling the Supremacy's tracking device.
The four escape Canto Bight with the help of some of the enslaved children there
; Rose gives one of them Paige's Rebel Alliance ring to inspire his trust.
Rose and the others return to the Supremacy and infiltrate the ship disguised as First Order officers, but are captured by General Hux and Captain Phasma before they can disable the tracking device.
The slicer betrays Rose and Finn, informing the First Order of their plan and providing information about the Resistance in exchange for his release and a monetary reward.
Phasma attempts to execute Rose and Finn, but BB-8 helps them escape and fight their way to freedom, killing Phasma in the process.
Meanwhile, the surviving Resistance forces escape to an old Rebel Alliance base on the nearby planet Crait; according to the Last Jedi novelization, the baffler technology developed by Rose helps the Resistance ships in their escape.
Rose, Finn, and BB-8 board a stolen First Order light shuttle and fly to Crait.
Along with Finn and Poe, Rose pilot a ski speeder in a defensive battle against First Order forces, during which they try to destroy a superlaser siege cannon before it can destroy the door to the base.
Finn attempts a hopeless suicide attack against the cannon, but Rose saves his life by crashing her speeder into his, knocking him off course and seriously injuring herself in the process.
Rose tells Finn the only way they will defeat the First Order is by fighting for what they love, rather than fighting what they hate and then falls unconscious.
Finn brings Rose back to the base, and her unconscious body is taken aboard the Millennium Falcon along with the other Resistance survivors.
Rose receives medical attention as they flee Crait and escape from the First Order.
===
The Rise of Skywalker ===
Rose returns in a smaller role in The Rise of Skywalker, the final film of the Star Wars
sequel trilogy.
Set about one year after the events of The Last Jedi, Rose has risen in the ranks of the Resistance and has taken on a greater leadership role, serving as head of the organization's Engineering Corps.
She is stationed on the Resistance's secret base on the jungle moon of Ajan Kloss at the start of the film.
When Rey, Finn, Poe Dameron, Chewbacca, C-3PO, and BB-8 embark on a mission to help track down the revived Palpatine, Finn invites Rose to come along.
She declines because General Leia Organa has asked her to study the specifications of Imperial Star Destroyers.
She later participates in the climactic battle scene at the end of the film, when the Resistance confronts the Sith Eternal's massive fleet of Xyston-class Star Destroyers, the Final Order, at the planet of Exegol.
Rose communicates with Finn and his ally Jannah during the battle, and expresses concern for their safety as the fighting intensifies.
She survives the battle and is present with the Resistance when they celebrate their victory later on Ajan Kloss.

===
Other media ===
Rose Tico has been featured in several Star Wars comic books.
She was the protagonist of "Rose Knows", a story in the sixth issue of the Star Wars Adventures comic book series, which was released on January 17, 2018. "
Rose Knows" portrays Rose as an extremely dedicated mechanic who, after first becoming stationed on the Raddus just prior to the events of The Last Jedi, continues working well after her shift ends to study the ship's manuals and learn more about the vessel.
The comic also included the first meeting of Rose and Resistance pilot and officer Poe Dameron, to whom she responded with an excitement similar to that when she met Finn in The Last Jedi.
The knowledge Rose obtains from her research of the Raddus
ultimately helps her in assisting Poe when his squadron is attacked by First Order TIE fighters.
Rose and Paige Tico were the protagonists of the final issue of Star Wars: Forces of Destiny, a five-issue comic book miniseries based on an animated web series of the same name.
The issue, entitled "Rose & Paige", was released on January 31, 2018, and was set before the events of The Force Awakens, when the Resistance was still based on D'Qar.
General Leia Organa is seeking methods to collect natural resources, and Rose conceives an idea to build rechargeable vehicles form junk parts.
Lacking confidence, Rose is reluctant to volunteer the idea, but Paige insists that she do so.
Despite some opposition from the base's engineers, Leia receives the idea warmly, and Rose gets two vehicles working with support from Paige and Leia.
The issue illustrated Rose's deep respect and admiration for Leia; she admitted to Paige, "Every time she talks to me, I can barely function."
Paige later becomes lost in the D'Qar jungles during a scouting mission, and Rose helps find and rescue her.
Rose was the protagonist of one of four announced installments in Age of Resistance, a comic book miniseries that chronicled different characters and time periods from the Star Wars chronology.
The issue, entitled Age of Resistance: Rose, was released in September 2019, and focused on Rose's relationship with her sister Paige during the First Order's invasion of Hays Minor.
This includes Rose and Paige working covertly to sabotage the First Order on the planet, as well as them fleeing Hays Minor to join the Resistance, at the insistence of their parents.
The comic was the first to directly show interaction between the Tico sisters and their parents, and particularly illustrates how they teach the sisters skills that will later serve them in the Resistance, such as piloting starfighters.
It also includes a scene in which Rose and Paige, upon learning of the destruction of Hays Minor, seek to take a ship and fly back to the planet for a suicidal revenge attack against First Order, but are stopped by Leia and urged to stay and serve the Resistance instead.
Rose appeared in "Shuttle Shock", a second season episode of the Star Wars: Forces of Destiny animated web series, created by Lucasfilm Animation and released through Disney's YouTube channel.
The series depicted two- or three-minute stories from various points in the Star Wars chronology. "
Shuttle Shock" was released on March 19, 2018, with Kelly Marie Tran reprising her role as the voice of Rose Tico.
The episode was set before Rose, Finn, and BB-8 reached Canto Bight in The Last Jedi.
Their space shuttle is attacked by huge jellyfish-like creatures, and Rose repairs a shorted out BB-8 while Finn attempts to fly to safety.
In early 2018, Rose was added as a playable character in the mobile collectible RPG game
Star Wars: Galaxy of Heroes.
Her character had special moves such as "Courageous Shot" and "Dauntless Idealism", and was able to stun characters with her shock prod, just as she did to Finn in The Last Jedi.
Rose Tico played a supporting role in the four-issue comic book miniseries Star Wars:
Allegiance, the first issue of which was released on October 9, 2019.
Written by Ethan Sacks and illustrated by Luke Ross and Lee Loughridge, Allegiance is set shortly after The Last Jedi, and in the story Leia asks Rose to accompany her on a mission to the planet Mon Cala to help secure allies for the Resistance.
When Leia and her party are threatened by potential enemies, Rose is quickly prepared to help defend them, though Leia attempts to defuse any hostilities.
Rose ends up arrested along with Rey, Chewbacca, and C-3PO after they get into a dispute with protestors from the Quarren species.
When Rey is coerced into a duel with a massive combat droid, Rose and Chewbacca interfere in the fight and help Rey defeat it.
In the final issue of the series, Rose works with Rey to track down a terrorist who attacked the group due to opposition to Mon Cala allying itself with the Resistance.
Rose also appeared in Lego Star Wars: All-Stars, a series of Lego Star Wars animated short films set in different time periods of the Star Wars chronology.
The series launched on October 29, 2018, with Tran once again providing the voice of Rose.
A profile about Rose Tico was featured in Star Wars: Women of the Galaxy, a book by Amy Ratcliffe highlighting 75 female characters from the Star Wars franchise.
The book was released on October 30, 2018.In the weeks approaching the release of The Rise of Skywalker, Rose was featured in the novels Star Wars: Spark of the Resistance and Star Wars: Resistance Reborn, both of which were released as part of a multimedia project called "Journey to Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker".
Spark of the Resistance, a junior novel by Justina Ireland released on October 4, 2019, tells the story of Rose, Rey, Poe, and BB-8 as they travel to an isolated planet called Minfar to investigate a distress signal.
There they discover the First Order has invaded the planet and threatened the indigenous population in an attempt to find secret laboratories and discover a legendary weapon called the Echo Horn, which has the ability to control the minds of its victims.
Rose and the others successfully repel the First Order and keep the weapon out of their hands.
The novel features illustrations of Rose and the other characters by artist Phil Noto.
Rose has a smaller part of in Resistance Reborn, a novel by Rebecca Roanhorse released on November 5, 2019, which details the efforts by General Leia Organa and the other Resistance members to rebuild their forces immediately following the defeats sustained in The Last Jedi.
In the novel, Rose has recovered quickly from the injuries she suffered in The Last Jedi and is actively working to help restore the Resistance.
The book also features a scene in which Poe inquires as to whether Finn has romantic interests in Rose, to which Finn response that although they shared "a moment" during their kiss on Crait, they are only friends.

== Characterization ==
Rose Tico was an excellent and highly imaginative mechanic, as seen by her design of the baffler system.
With a methodical, technical mind, Rose lacked formal training in mechanical engineering and her knowledge was largely self-taught, which made her resourceful, inventive, and prone to outside-the-box thinking.
For example, most characters in The Last Jedi reacted with shock that the First Order was tracking the Resistance through hyperspace because it was believed to be impossible, but Rose deduced how it is being done and helped develop a solution.
Rose was passionate, loyal, and committed, with a great deal of enthusiasm and intelligence, and a strong moral code.
Idealistic and energetic, she maintained a sense of optimism despite her difficult past and the challenge the Resistance faces against the First Order.
She could be tough, stubborn, and blunt, as well as intensely focused and determined.
But she was also kind, and understood the value of protecting what is good, rather than just fighting what is bad.
Rose also had a great deal of fascination with the galaxy around her, and a sense of awe about the Resistance and the heroes that serve it.
She was hard-working, resilient, and brave, though The Daily Telegraph noted her courage is subtle and not flashy "in a dashing, daring Poe Dameron-style way".
Rose strongly believed in the cause of the Resistance, to which she dedicated her life, and she placed that cause ahead of all things, including herself.
In this way she differed from Finn at the start of The Last Jedi, who was more concerned about himself and his friends than with helping the Resistance or stopping the First Order.
However, the example Rose set for Finn inspired him, leading him to capture some of her idealism and place the mission of the Resistance ahead of himself.
The Last Jedi writer and director Rian Johnson has described Rose as the "angel on Finn's shoulder", serving as his conscience and trying to steer him in the right direction, while the unnamed slicer they encountered serves the opposite function.
Rose's willingness without hesitation to give her precious medallion to the unnamed slicer in exchange for his help showed her unflinching demonstration to the Resistance cause.
However, she could also be rebellious, and was willing to disobey orders to do what she thinks is right, as shown by her willingness to work with Finn and Poe on a secret plan to help the Resistance in The Last Jedi.
Rose was very close with her family, and a strong sense of right and wrong was instilled in her by her late parents and her sister Paige.
Rose particularly looked up to Paige, and the two had an extremely strong emotional connection; according to the Cobalt Squadron novel, the two had never been apart for more than a couple of days, and they shared "a bond that would have been extraordinary even between twins".
That bond, along with their shared tragic history, helped propel them to do the right thing in the face of danger.
Prior to the events of The Last Jedi, Rose was more shy and self-conscious, but Paige had faith in Rose's abilities and encouraged her even when Rose herself lacked confidence.
Paige often forced her younger sister to step forward and be more forthcoming about her ideas and thoughts.
This was particularly illustrated in the "Rose & Paige" issue of the Star Wars: Forces of Destiny comic book, during which Rose hesitated to share an idea with General Leia Organa until Paige pushed her to do so.
In writing about Rose's past in Forces of Destiny and the Star Wars Adventures comic books, writer Delilah S. Dawson said she believed the example Paige set for Rose "
gave her context for her increased confidence and strength in The Last Jedi.
"
When Paige died, Rose felt a void in her own identity, according to Tran, but ultimately Paige's love for Rose helped her become more confident and carry on after her sister was gone.
Paige's death also drove Rose that much harder to fight against the First Order, so her sister's death would not be in vain.
Rose's rage toward the First Order was informed not only by Paige's death, but also because she personally witnessed the brutality and devastation it unleashed on her home planet of Hays Minor.
As a result, her dedication to the Resistance was not tied to a noble, abstract idea of heroism, but a firsthand knowledge of the threat they are fighting, which gave her a deeper understanding of the war than even some of the soldiers around her.
Rose's past experiences also made her feel anger at the mistreatment of others, particularly vulnerable populations, as seen by her contempt for Canto Bight and her sympathy for both the enslaved children and the abused creatures there.
Rose's feelings occasionally manifested in anger, such as her reaction when she discovered Finn attempting to flee the Raddus, or when she said of Canto Bight that she wished she could "put (her)
first through this whole lousy beautiful town".
However, Rose was also very empathetic, as demonstrated by the kindness she showed the children on Canto Bight, and the way she rescued Finn at the end of The Last Jedi.
Rose also served the role of everywoman in The Last Jedi.
Her idealistic nature was something the viewer is meant to identify with; Johnson said in creating the character, he wanted to make someone who could inspire his "10-year-old self".
Both Johnson and Tran have described Rose as an unlikely hero who preferred to work in the background, but was pulled into a prominent position in the conflict by the circumstances around her.
While the Star Wars franchise often focused on particularly strong or powerful heroes, Rose was a very low-ranking member of the Resistance, and she demonstrated that every position matters and anyone, no matter their status or position, can make a difference.
She also illustrated how war affects the average person.
Despite her talents and abilities, Rose did not consider herself a hero, nor was she seeking to become one.
Tran said of the character: "It's such a huge deal to me, the idea that she's not necessarily special in the way that we have defined special before in other movies, or in other stories.
"Rose has also been described as the personification of real-life Star Wars fandom, with Tran herself saying: "I definitely believe that Rose embodies the idea of a fan being pulled into something that’s kind of crazy.
"
This was particularly illustrated in Rose's excitement about meeting Finn for the first time, during which she trips over her words, excitedly calling him "The Finn", and nervously said "doing talking [sic] with Resistance heroes isn't really my forte".
She had similar reactions upon meeting other Resistance figures in other works of Star Wars media, including Poe Dameron and Leia Organa.

==
Concept and creation ==


===
Conception ===
Rose Tico was created by Rian Johnson for the film Star Wars:
The Last Jedi (2017), which he wrote and directed.
While working on the script, he originally had the characters Poe Dameron and Finn go to Canto Bight together, but he decided having a female character accompany Finn would make for a more interesting dynamic because otherwise, "it was just these two dudes on an adventure".
Johnson said in the original versions of the script with Poe and Finn together, their dialogue could have been interchangeable and there was no conflict between them.
This led him to conceive the Rose Tico character, who, in Johnson's words, could "actually challenge [Finn] and push him and contrast with him was where Rose came
from".
Johnson conceived Rose Tico as a relatable audience surrogate, and said he "wanted someone who 10-year-old me would truly be able to relate to, someone who was a genuine nerd, someone who it would be a little surprising that they were front and forward in a Star Wars movie".
Details about the character were first discussed at the Star Wars Celebration convention in Orlando, Florida, on April 14, 2017.
At the time, she was only referenced by her first name, "Rose"; her last name "Tico" was not revealed until a Vanity Fair article on May 23, 2017.
Johnson described Rose Tico as the "biggest new part in the movie", and his favorite new character introduced in the film.
Johnson said of the character: "She's not a soldier.
She's not looking to be a hero, and she gets pulled a very big way into an adventure in this movie with Finn.
...
She's pretty rad."
Rose has the most screen time of any new character introduced in The Last Jedi.
The name Rose was originally used for the character Maz Kanata during the pre-production of Star Wars:
The Force Awakens.
The name is a tribute to Rose Gilbert, the late high school English teacher who instructed both Force Awakens director J.J. Abrams and production designer Rick Carter.
A handful of scenes involving Rose in the original The Last Jedi scripts were either eliminated or revised in later drafts.
For example, in the original script, Finn was a gunner along with Paige during her bombing run, and he witnessed her death.
Johnson removed this from later script drafts because he had trouble reconciling it with Finn's later relationship with Rose.
Additionally, the master codebreaker Rose and Finn sought was originally planned to be an insectoid warlord who involved Rose and Finn in an effort to rob a rival.
This led to an extended sequence of Finn, Rose, and the codebreaker's crew climbing atop the casino rooftop during an attempted robbery, which ended with Finn and Rose getting arrested.

===
Casting ===
Kelly Marie Tran spent years struggling to find work and doing temporary jobs on the side, and had considered quitting acting altogether before auditioning for The Last Jedi.
Tran was not a Star Wars fan and had never seen a film in the franchise before seeking the role.
She believed that ultimately helped her in her audition, because she didn't have pre-established expectations or attempt to model Rose on characters from the previous films.
Hundreds of actresses auditioned for the part of Rose Tico.
Tran, a Harry Potter fan, wore her lucky Ravenclaw tie to the audition, but later became concerned when the other actresses were wearing more serious attire.
Nevertheless, she wore the tie again during her first callback.
Tran went through five intense rounds of auditions over five months between the summer and fall of 2015, with one month spanning between each audition.
Johnson observed her during her second audition, and immediately liked her; he said watching her felt like seeing the character he pictured in his mind during the writing process.
During one of the auditions, Tran did one-on-one reads alongside John Boyega, the actor who portrays Finn, to determine whether the two actors had chemistry and worked well together.
Boyega said it was clear from the start of their readings together that Tran was the best actress for the part.
The final audition took place in London with full hair, makeup, and costuming.
Three weeks later, in November 2015, Johnson met with Tran and offered her the role.
Johnson said of the audition process: "We saw a lot of talented actresses of a very broad range, but honestly, it was more about finding Kelly."
Johnson said Tran had an oddball nature and genuine sweetness to her, and he knew audiences would want her character to succeed.
He said of the actress: "She has the most open heart of anyone I’ve ever met
and I knew that was going to shine through onscreen."
Johnson said her chemistry with Boyega was another main reason she got the part.
J. J. Abrams, the producer, co-writer and director of The Force Awakens and The Last Jedi, has said of Tran's casting: "I was grateful to Rian Johnson for so many things that he did, but the greatest for me was casting Kelly Marie.
"
Boyega felt Tran's background in improv comedy and numerous Internet videos ultimately helped Tran bring to the role a light tone necessary for The Last Jedi, despite the seriousness of the narrative.
After receiving the part, Rose Tico watched all the Star Wars films, read several books, and listened to podcasts about it, becoming a fan of the franchise.
The casting of Tran was first announced on the official Star Wars website on February 15, 2016, which described the actress as a "talented newcomer".
Tran discussed the character for the first time publicly at the Star Wars Celebration convention in Orlando, where she said: "She's part of the Resistance, and she works in maintenance.
I can’t wait for you to meet her."
In later interviews, Tran said she hopes the character will show viewers that "even if you are not born a princess or into a position of privilege, if you are a background player and aren't a frontrunner like a star pilot, you can still make a difference".

The Last Jedi was Tran's first film role.
A Vietnamese American
, she was the first woman of color to play a leading character in a Star Wars film.
Tran said she believes it was important to have a strong female Asian American character in Star Wars because she knows from her own childhood
how important it is for young people to see characters like themselves represented in film, television, and books.
She said: "A lot of Star Wars fans who are specifically Asian never had a character they could dress up like ..
I get very emotional when I see people who are able to identify with this character.
That means a lot to me and I don’t think it will ever get old."
Tran said she felt it was a major responsibility to portray someone viewers would look up to, and she wanted to do the character justice.
Johnson was not specifically seeking an Asian American actress for the role, and audition notices indicated they were open to actresses from any ethnicity.
In May 2017, Tran posed as Rose on the cover of Vanity Fair, becoming the first Asian American cover to appear on the magazine's cover.
In December 2017, Disney arranged for Tran to embark on a press tour in Singapore and her parents’ home country of Vietnam to publicize The Last Jedi.

===
Costume design ===
The costume design for Rose Tico was being developed for The Last Jedi before the actress was cast.
The crew knew from the early stages that her primary costume would be a basic coverall.
Johnson requested that it be "pretty shapeless", and something that either a man or woman could wear.
The costume is a variation of the uniform members of the Resistance ground crew wear in The Force Awakens, with minor modifications to give it a slightly different look.
The same color from the original uniforms, which costume supervisor David Crossman called "acidy green", was kept for Rose's costume.
The original script called for Rose to wear a beautiful gown during the Canto Bight scenes, so she would blend in with the other wealthy clientele.
Costume designer Michael Kaplan said the scene was "going to be a big reveal for Rose, going from this frumpy-dumpy coverall to a beautiful gown".
This idea was ultimately abandoned, and it was decided that Rose would wear the coverall costume throughout the entire Canto Bight subplot, which had the effect of making Rose and Finn stick out among the crowd.
Costume designer Michael Kaplan said of the coverall costume:
It's in her character.
She's not someone that has to look good for work.
Rose is a no-nonsense character.
She just plugs along
and she's spunky.
So it does work.

Tran wore a form-fitting First Order uniform as a disguise during her The Last Jedi scenes with Finn and the unnamed slicer aboard the Supremacy.
Kaplan said the costume crew wanted to choose a color for the costume that would "enhance" Rose, but they were limited to the First Order colors of black, gray, or teal.
They chose teal because they wanted to establish her as the highest-ranking officer of the trio.
The idea of the medallions worn by Rose and Paige Tico came from Carrie Fisher, the actress who portrayed General Leia Organa.
She insisted to Rian Johnson that the movie needed "space jewelry," with which he agreed.
The original script called for the medallions worn by Rose and Paige to be a two-part pendant that could be placed together to form a single image.
This was later changed so that both Rose and Paige had identical medallions, but concept artist Matthew Savage said they still have a yin and yang quality about them.
Various designs were created for the medallions, but Johnson's favorite was one based on a Celtic reference suggested by set decorator Richard Roberts.
That version was ultimately used in the film.
Johnson and Kaplan spent a great deal of time debating Rose's hair style, spending days of hair tests and trying multiple wigs.
In the end, Tran's real hair was cut into a shape that would look good in a ponytail, but resulted in a mushroom-like shape when taken down.

===
Filming ===
In January 2016, Tran moved to London to begin filming.
She was bound by confidentiality agreements not to discuss the character and could not tell anyone that she was working on a Star Wars film, even her own family.
Tran told them she was filming an independent movie in Canada; she sent them photos of Canada that she downloaded from Google, and purchased Canadian maple syrup for them as a gift to make the ruse more convincing.
To prevent secrets about the film from leaking during filming, Tran and the other actors were driven around the sets in cars with tinted windows, and made to wear black robes
so people would not recognize them.
On her first day on the Last Jedi set, Tran saw Anthony Daniels performing as C-3PO and hugged him, which she called "the best experience ever".
She said it could be difficult at times maintaining her composure and managing her excitement working on a Star Wars set, especially as a fairly new actress.
Tran said: "You have to find a way to just do the work and kind of block everything (else) out.
But then, C-3PO comes up
and you're like, 'Oh.'
You're constantly figuring out, 'How can I work in this environment,' but also, '
This is awesome.'"

Tran was not used to living without her established support system, and often felt scared and lonely during filming, occasionally crying because she wished her friends could be part of the experience it.
To combat the isolation, she joined an improvisational theatre class in London, kept journals, and sought companionship from her fellow cast members, especially John Boyega.
Tran shared more scenes with Boyega than any other cast member, and she said it was very easy to work with him, and that she learned a lot from him.
The two laughed and joked regularly on the set, and occasionally improvised during filming.
Tran said of Boyega: "John is someone who I feel like I immediately was able to mesh with.
We connect on different levels because our parents are immigrants, we’re both people of color, nerds, and he's just hilarious.
"
At one point after filming a scene together, Boyega said to Tran, "Kelly, we are making history," which helped the actress realize the magnitude of appearing in the film.
She said of Boyega: "He was the best partner I could have had on a massive movie like this.
"Tran said director Rian Johnson made her feel very comfortable on the set and collaborated with her, seeking her thoughts and suggestions about the character.
She said: "Rian was so good at inspiring that trust, and I think everyone on set felt as comfortable as me."
In early versions of the script, Tran said Rose Tico was "more sarcastic and grumpy", and Johnson compared her to the Winnie-the-Pooh character Eeyore.
However, once Tran was cast, the character's personality gradually changed to match that of the actress herself.
This is particularly reflected in the excitement and
enthusiasm Rose showed during the scene in which she met Finn.
In the original script, Rose was immediately suspicious of Finn, but because of the way the character had changed to match Tran's personality, Johnson realized she should admire Finn initially and be excited to meet him.
It was one of the few scenes in The Last Jedi that Johnson rewrote during the production.
Tran said of developing the character: "
Sometimes I think Kelly informed Rose, and sometimes I think Rose informed me.
It's such a messy, tangled relationship, which I think is kind of beautiful.
She's always going to be part of me
and I'm always going to be part of her.
"Tran called filming The Last Jedi "the ultimate acting class".
She was particularly excited to work with Laura Dern, of whom she was a strong admirer, and Carrie Fisher, who inspired Tran with her confidence and honesty.
Tran said she felt Fisher was indirectly protecting her just by virtue of her strong personality.
Tran and Boyega were also particularly impressed by Benicio Del Toro, who plays the unnamed slicer that they share multiple scenes with; she said they were obsessed with Del Toro, adding: "Every time he did anything, we would just turn to each other and say, 'He's such a legend!"
Tran enjoyed playing the augmented reality mobile game Pokémon Go on the set of The Last Jedi, and got others on the cast and crew to play it as well, including Johnson and Boyega.
Tran shared a physical trainer with Daisy Ridley, the actress who played Rey, and had to follow a difficult fitness regimen, becoming so strong she learned how to push a car.
The film's stunt crew taught Tran styles of fighting and how to use various weapons, as well as different types of falls and jumps, including, according to Tran, "how to take a bullet".
Tran was so impressed with the work that went into making The Last Jedi that she often visited the set on days when she wasn't performing herself, visiting the art, creature, production design, and costume departments.
Johnson was nervous about filming the scene immediately after Rose and Finn first met, in which Rose was dragging a stunned Finn away on a cart, because the dialogue involved a great deal of exposition
and he feared it would be difficult to make it effective.
Johnson credited the acting abilities of Tran and Boyega for making it work.
The scenes in which Rose and Finn escaped from Canto Bight by riding giant creatures were shot during the final two weeks of filming.
The sequence was created by visual effects company Industrial Light & Magic, who planned out the animation, then created a motion base that Tran and Boyega rode atop.
The base and a motion-controlled camera were programmed to move at a speed and route that matched the planned animation.
A handful of scenes involving Rose were filmed, but cut from the final version of The Last Jedi.
In one, after Rose and Finn were captured on the Supremacy, General Hux mocked Rose after seeing her medallion, and she responds by biting his finger.
Johnson thought it was a good character moment for Rose, but it was cut due to pacing issues.
In another deleted scene, after escaping from the Supremacy on a shuttle, Rose and Finn discussed their next destination and ultimately decided to rejoin the Resistance forces on Crait.
Dialogue that involved Rose chastising Finn for being too emotionally attached to Rey was also cut from the film.
To understand the mindset of Rose's traumatic past experiences with war, Tran researched her own family's experiences during the Vietnam War; her parents had to flee the country during the conflict, and she had other relatives who tried to escape at the time but could not.
She also listened to podcasts about the Vietnam War to learn more about the conflict.
Tran felt a connection between Rose's past experiences and those of Tran's own family, particularly the fact that both suffered losses and experienced poverty due to war.
Tran said, "A lot of the things (Rose) is dealing with are things that I already had inside me".
Tran also listened to podcasts and read books about engineers and how they think, which helped her better understand Tico's role as a mechanic and maintenance worker.
Tran did not share any actual screen time with Veronica Ngo, who played Rose's sister Paige, but they spent time together off-camera and would go to restaurants together and regularly send text messages to each other.
Tran felt a connection with Ngo, who is from Vietnam like Tran's family, and Tran helped her with taped auditions for roles Ngo was seeking.
Tran felt the moment Rose kissed Finn was one of her character's bravest moments:
"It's one thing to believe in a cause and to fight for it, but I think it’s a different type of courage to put yourself in a position where you’re emotionally vulnerable.
To put yourself out there romantically, for me that’s very hard.
"
It was Tran's first on-screen kiss, but she said Boyega made it easier because of his openness and generosity.
Rose's
arguably most important and famous line in The Last Jedi was delivered to Finn at the end of the film: "
That's how we're going win.
Not fighting what we hate.
Saving what we love."
The line, written by Johnson, was partially inspired by a similar statement made by Irvin Kershner, the director of The Empire Strikes Back (1980), the second film in the original Star Wars trilogy.
Describing the difference between the Rebel Alliance and the Galactic Empire in that film, Kershner said: "That's the difference between the Rebels and the Empire.
It's possible to fight because you love, not just because you hate."
Johnson read the quote in the book
Once Upon a Galaxy: A Journal of the Making of The Empire Strikes Back (1980) and incorporated it into The Last Jedi.
After filming wrapped on The Last Jedi, Tran spent a year away from acting, in part to enjoy her last few months of anonymity before her role in Star Wars became widely known.
She worked on an endangered wildlife reserve in South Africa, where there was no electricity, running water, or Internet access.
Nobody there knew she was an actress until Rose Tico toys started coming out.
Tran later went to Vietnam to work with orphans, and brought her parents back to their home country for the first time since they fled during the Vietnam War 40 years earlier.

=== Non-film portrayals ===
The first Rose Tico action figures were revealed by Hasbro on September 1, 2017, as part of a Star Wars merchandising event called "Force Friday".
A Funko Pop figurine of the character was released the same day, as was a Lego Star Wars set of the Resistance Transport Pod vehicle that included Lego figurines of Rose, Finn, and BB-8.
The novelization of Star Wars: The Last Jedi, written by Jason Fry, includes a moment between Rose and Paige Tico that was not featured in the film, during which Rose says goodbye to Paige before the latter departed for the bombing mission that ultimately kills her.
Kelly Marie Tran provided the narration for the audiobook version of Elizabeth E. Wein's Star Wars: The Last Jedi: Cobalt Squadron novel.
The audiobook was released on December 15, 2017, the same day as the novel and the Last Jedi film.
Comic book writer Delilah S. Dawson wrote Rose Tico's stories for both the "Rose & Paige" issue of Star Wars: Forces of Destiny comic book series, and the "Rose Knows" story in the Star Wars Adventures comic book series.
Rose was illustrated by Nicoletta Baldari in Forces of Destiny, with covers portraying the two title characters by Baldari, penciller Elsa Charretier and colorist Matt Wilson.
Artist Derek Charm illustrated the "Rose Knows" comic and one of its covers, while Tim Levins illustrated an alternative cover.
Before writing the stories, Dawson read the script for The Last Jedi in November 2016, as well as an early draft of the Cobalt Squadron novel.
This gave her an understanding of the personalities and speech patterns of Rose and Paige Tico for her own writing.
Dawson was excited to write about the Tico sisters because she was a "huge fan" of the characters and she considered them a strong role model for children, as well as "a study in finding people who lift you up and believe in you and in using that belief to do what you can’t do alone".
She said of Rose and Paige: "
To me, they’re the heart of what the Resistance means: ordinary people willing to make sacrifices in the hopes that other people and planets won’t have to suffer.
"
Baldari said her illustrations of Rose and Paige was partially inspired by that of Anna and Elsa, sister characters from the Disney animated film Frozen (2013), on which Baladri also worked.
Age of Resistance: Rose Tico was written by Tom Taylor, who specifically requested to write an issue about Rose because she was his son's favorite character.
Taylor said of it, "it's probably the best issue, or the one that we feel the closest to".

== Reception ==


===
Critical reception ===
The character of Rose Tico and performance by Kelly Marie Tran has received a largely positive reception from critics but mixed reviews from fans, with several commentators calling her the breakout star of The Last Jedi.
Katerina Daley of Screen Rant said, based on critic and fan reactions alike, "Rose Tico has quickly gone on to become yet another character in the long line of icons to emerge from Star Wars."
Daley praised Rose Tico's vulnerability, wit, strength, and compassion, saying she embodies all the traits that make Star Wars heroes great.
The Observer film critic Mark Kermode called Tran's performance "winning" and the Rose Tico character an immediate fan favorite.
Alistair Harkness of The Scotsman called Kelly Marie Tran the heart of The Last Jedi, much like John Boyega was for The Force Awakens, and that the two characers are "more interesting to hang out with than some of the more established characters whose adventures we've seen in their prime".
Annlee Ellingson of L.A. Biz wrote: "The first Asian-American woman to play a major role in a Star Wars film, Tran is a welcome addition both culturally and narratively, bringing much-appreciated representation to the cinematic universe.
She’s also a gosh darn delight."
Michael Sragow of Film Comment praised Tran's energetic and emotional performance, which he said made Rose the most rousing figure among the film's heroes.
Sragow said the character "blows into the movie with a fan's enthusiasm, a can-do spirit, and bracing undercurrents of proletarian
rebellion".
Variety's Meredith Woerner said Tran's performance had an energy and passion that energized Star Wars fans.
Woerner wrote: "Stealing the spotlight from The Force Awakens favorites, Tran injected the galaxy far, far away with a dose of pure enthusiasm."
Anna Menta of Newsweek said Rose Tico "has quickly become a favorite addition to the Star Wars universe", and that Tran's off-camera personality and enthusiasm has helped endeared her even more to fans.
Los Angeles Times writer Jen Yamato called Rose Tico an instant fan favorite.
Likewise, Matthew Aguilar of Comicbooks.com said Tran already developed a large fanbase among Star Wars fans even before the film was released.
Quad-City Times writer Linda Cook called Rose one of her favorite new Star Wars characters, praising her compelling background and relationship with Finn.
Pete Hammond of Deadline Hollywood called Rose a great new character and welcome addition to the franchise.
The Week culture critic Lili Loofbourow called Rose Tico "one of my favorite additions to the franchise".
Metro Silicon Valley writer Richard von Busack described Tran's performance as a show-stealer.
Insider writer Kirsten Acuna said Rose, along with Rey, gave young girls and female Star Wars fans a hero to serve as a role model.
The Daily Herald included Tran's performance as Rose Tico in its list of 10 great screen performers from 2017, with writer Sean Strangland calling the character "a delight".
Film director Jon M. Chu has praised the character and publicly urged the streaming service Disney+
to let him create a television series about Rose.
Richard Trenholm of CNET called Rose delightful to watch, praising her chemistry with Finn and saying she represented the "indomitable moral spirit of Star Wars with her clear-eyed determination to do the right thing".
The Stranger writer Andrew Wright said Rose Tico "makes a strong bid for MVP" among the new Star Wars characters introduced in The Last Jedi.
David Sims of The Atlantic called Rose a "wonderfully sneaky" character because she initially appears to be a sidekick for Finn, but instead becomes an equal partner who teaches him important lessons.
John W. Allman of Creative Loafing called Rose a strong addition with a solid backstory, who elevated and brought a renewed focus to Finn's character.
Nerdist writer Rosie Knight called Rose a much-needed addition to the Star Wars universe, and Lindsey Romain, also of Nerdist, said she "represents hope and positivity in a fandom that can often feel overwhelmingly negative".
Dominic Griffin of Spectrum Culture wrote that Rose "emerges as a compelling lead equal to the others in emotional resonance".
Pam Powell of the San Francisco Daily Journal said Rose shines with personality, with a wonderful sense of humor and timing, and that she pleasantly anticipated seeing her with each scene.
The Daily Beast senior entertainment editor Marlow Stern called Tran's performance "a breath of fresh air".
Ruben Rosario of MiamiArtzine called Tran's performance charming and relatable.
Molly Templeton called Rose an excellent addition to the Star Wars universe.
Kirk Baird of The Blade said Tran delivered an "honestly sweet performance".
The Atlantic writer Christopher Orr was critical of the Canto Bight sequence, but said Tran's performance helped to enliven it.
Some critics who disliked The Last Jedi were still complimentary toward aspects of Rose Tico's character or Tran's performance.
Salon writer Matthew Rozsa, who disliked the film and particularly criticized the Canto Bight sequence, nevertheless noted: "the chemistry between Finn and Rose makes them easily the most likable and sympathetic characters in the film".
Similarly, Ryan Syrek of The Reader felt the first half of The Last Jedi was clunky and the subplot involving Finn and Rose's efforts to shut down the tracking device worked poorly, but he said the character dynamics between the two were strong and described Rose his favorite character from the new trilogy.
Alyssa Rosenberg, an opinion writer for The Washington Post who was critical of The Last Jedi, said of Kelly Marie Tran: "like nearly everyone in this movie, (she) deserved better writing than she was given".
Tor.com writer Emmet Asher-Perrin said the character "deserves more attention than the film is capable of giving her".
Chris Gore of Film Threat said he very much liked the Rose character, but found the Canto Bight scenes to be an unnecessary diversion.
Several critics responded negatively to the Canto Bight subplot with Rose and Finn, calling it an unnecessary and distracting element of the film that contributed little to the overall storyline.
Other critics were more negative about the Rose Tico character.
Gulf News writer Shyama Krishna Kumar called Rose a welcome addition overall, but said she "could have benefited from additional depth".
Cinevue writer Christopher Machell described the character as woefully underwritten.
Kyle Pinion of The Beat called the character "basically a non-entity", saying she "never seems to grow beyond 'earnest'" and her relationship with Finn felt rushed.
Armond White of the National Review calls the relationship between Finn and Rose a politically correct "multi-culti play".
Aine O'Connor of the Irish Independent called the Rose and Finn pairing and subplot weak.
The New York Observer writer felt Finn and Rose had bad chemistry and called their storyline a "misguided side-quest".
===
Online attacks and harassment ===
Despite the positive reviews, Tran became the subject of racist and sexist attacks over the Internet, including insults about her ethnicity and weight, which began immediately after her casting was announced.
In a March 2018 interview, Tran said she had been receiving "really acidic, misogynistic, racist comments" regarding her role as Rose Tico.
Tran has been the target of racist trolling on Twitter.
In one example, right-wing Internet personality Paul Ray Ramsey mocked Tran's weight.
Rose Tico's entry on Wookieepedia, an online encyclopedia about the Star Wars universe, was edited to include racist and vulgar comments in December 2017, which drew national media attention.
Fandom, the wiki hosting service that operated the domain, removed the offensive edits, protected the page, and publicly condemned the vandalism.
The character of Rose Tico was defended by the official Star Wars page on Facebook.
In response to complaints about the character's actions in The Last Jedi, the Facebook page responded with a list of positive and significant actions done by the character, and wrote: "Personal growth is inherent to every Star Wars story.
Without the detour to Canto Bight, Finn wouldn't have grown past only caring about himself and his immediate circle of friends.
And Rose wouldn't have discovered her own ability to be the type of hero she idolized.
"In
June 2018, Tran deleted all of her Instagram posts in response to online harassment, and replaced the account bio with, "Afraid, but doing it anyway.
"
She also pursued therapy following the harassment.
Salon writer Nicole Karlis suggested many of the discriminatory attacks came from "white privileged men" afraid of a strong female character who is not hypersexualized in a film, writing: "I can't help but wonder:
if Tran's character aligned with the misogynistic and racist stereotype of Asian women as submissive and seductive, would the trolls have still come out?"
Esquire writer Dom Nero called the bullying of Tran "another example of the rising current of hatred and discrimination in our culture", and said it came from a "very vocal minority of Star Wars fans who do not agree with the progressive ideals set forth in the refreshingly inclusive, emotionally-nuanced film".
A study released in October 2018 found that up to 51% of the attacks Tran received on social media may have come from Russian bots instead of actual Star Wars fans.
Several cast and crew members of The Last Jedi condemned the attacks and spoke out in defense of Tran, including Rian Johnson, John Boyega, and actors Domhnall Gleeson, and Mark Hamill, the last of whom tweeted a picture of himself with Tran and wrote the caption, "What's not to love?
#
GetALifeNerds".
Johnson branded the attackers as "manbabies", and said they represent a "few unhealthy people" and not the "vast majority" of Star Wars fans.
Claudia Gray, an author who had written several Star Wars books, said the attacks against Tran ran counter to the principles of the franchise, and people who did not understand that "were never a Star Wars fan to begin with".
Other celebrities have expressed support for Tran as well, including Josh Gad, Kumail Nanjiani, Gabrielle Union, Elijah Wood, and Edgar Wright.
Stephen Colbert condemned Tran's attackers during a segment on The Late Show with Stephen Colbert, during which he presented a mock trailer for The Last Jedi specifically designed to make "racist, misogynist nerds" angry.
In less than one day, more than 20,000 fans retweeted a message of support for Tran from a fan on Twitter that sought to "drown out the manbabies".
Star Wars fans began circulating fan art of Rose Tico on Twitter to show support for Tran, along with the hashtag #FanArtForRose.
She was also shown support at the 2018 San Diego Comic-Con during a "Rally for Rose", during which fans appeared in cosplay attire as Rose Tico or wore "Rose for Hope" T-shirts.
Fans posted about the event on social media using the hashtags #ForceOutHate and #RallyForRose.
In response to the harassment, Tran wrote an essay for The New York Times entitled "Kelly Marie Tran: I Won't Be Marginalized by Online Harassment", which ran on August 21, 2018.
She wrote that the attacks reinforced microaggressions she had long faced as a Vietnamese American, and which sought to reinforce a narrative that Asians should be marginalized and treated only as minor characters, both in stories and in real life.
Tran said she even began to believe the negative statements made about her, and that they sent her down "a spiral of self-hate, into the darkest recesses of my mind, places where I tore myself apart, where I put their words above my own self-worth".
She wrote: "Their words reinforced a narrative I had heard my whole life: that I was 'other', that I didn't belong, that I wasn't good enough, simply because I wasn't like them.
And that feeling, I realize now, was, and is, shame, a shame for the things that made me different, a shame for the culture from which I came from."
She concluded with: "You might know me as Kelly.
I am the first woman of color to have a leading role in a Star Wars movie.
I am the first Asian woman to appear on the cover of Vanity Fair.
My real name is Loan.
And I am just getting started."
Tran later said the New York Times essay was difficult to write, but also "probably one of the proudest moments of [her] career thus far".
When Tran appeared during a panel about The Rise of Skywalker at the Star Wars Celebration in Chicago on April 12, 2019, she received a swell of support from the crowd, who chanted her name and gave her a standing ovation, causing the actress to tear up onstage.
Clarisse Loughrey of The Independent called it "the unexpected highlight of the panel" and wrote: "Tran's reception was not only heartening
, it was a moment of pure relief for so many fans of the franchise, worried that the well had finally been poisoned beyond repair."
===
The Rise of Skywalker ===
Prior to the release of The Rise of Skywalker, fans and writers expressed concern about how little Rose Tico had been featured in the film's marketing and merchandising, including her omission from film trailers, as well as her exclusion from posters, clothing, and action figure sets that featured the other Resistance heroes.
Several examples of shirts, trading cards, and other memorabilia surfaced in which Rose was not only excluded, but was originally included and later removed.
Fans began using the hashtag #WheresRose in protest of her absence, with some calling the move part of a larger trend of erasing women of color from such merchandising.
Some writers suggested the decision could be a response to the discriminatory attacks to the Rose Tico character and Tran's performance; Lindsey Romain of Nerdist wrote: "It’s also hard not to feel like the racist misogynists are being catered to in these decisions."
A set of individual The Rise of Skywalker character posters released on November 20 initially did not include Rose, but a poster featuring her was released the next day.
Following the release of The Rise of Skywalker, Rose's minor role in the film became a major point of criticism among fans and reviewers alike.
Rose received one minute and sixteen seconds of screen time in the 142-minute film, much shorter than the ten minutes and
fifty-three seconds she received in The Last Jedi, and a shorter amount of time than Rose's sister Paige received in her single scene in The Last Jedi.
An early scene in which Rose opts to stay on the Resistance base while Rey, Finn, and Poe go on adventure together was taken by many as a direct response to the audience reception of The Last Jedi and Rose's arc within the film.
Tran had said in interviews before the film's release that she was looking forward to scenes with Rose and Rey together in The Rise of Skywalker, but fans and critics noted that no such scenes appeared in the final cut.
Fans expressed disappointment and anger on social media, with the hashtags #JusticeForRose and #RoseTicoDeservedBetter trending on Twitter the week after the film's release.

Several critics in their reviews of the finished film criticized Rose's minor role, with some calling it a validation of the people who attacked and harassed Tran online.
Critics said she was "sidelined" and commenting on how she was written out "without any explanation," and her minor role was considered by one critic to be "one of the film's biggest disappointments."
Paul Tassi of Forbes called it a "cowardly response to two years of constant abuse of Tran", and sent a negative message that film directors and writers could be influenced by people who express enough hatred and vitriol on the Internet.
Vivian Kane of The Mary Sue wrote of J. J. Abrams: "
With his treatment of Rose, it's hard to believe he wasn't listening to even the most toxic corners of the internet."
Slate writer Violet Kim said that even if Rose's reduced role was not a response to the harassment, it showed the filmmakers did not understand how deeply her exclusion "would hit those to whom she meant so much".
Comic Book Resources writer Anthony Gramuglia said Rose's screen time "comes across as a failure to support an actor who was put in a rough situation, as if Disney were throwing her to the wolves".
Actor Jimmy Wong wrote on Twitter that he was "livid" with the treatment of Rose, pointing out that newly-introduced background characters received more dialogue than her.
Mike Reyes of CinemaBlend argued other factors could have accounted for Rose's minor role, such as scenes getting cut for pacing purposes, or revisions to the script after screenwriting duties were transferred from original writers Colin Trevorrow and Derek Connolly to J. J. Abrams and Chris Terrio.
In an interview, Terrio said the filmmakers were not trying to deliberately sideline Rose in the film, stressing that he and Abrams "adore" Tran.
He said they wanted Rose to stay behind with Leia while the other characters were away because they wanted one of the principal characters to be an "anchor" for those scenes, which he described as an indication of Rose's importance.
Her screen time was cut, Terrio said, because some of the repurposed footage featuring Carrie Fisher did not meet the standard of realism they had hoped for, so they were deleted from the film.
When approached on the red carpet at the 2020 Academy Awards about her shorter role in the film, Tran stated she was impressed by how Abrams resolved so many different storylines, adding: "At the end of the day, I got to be part of something bigger than me, and that's really special."
==
Notes ==


==
References ==


===
Bibliography ===
Fry, Jason (December 15, 2017).
Star Wars:
The Last Jedi: Incredible Cross-Sections.
London: DK Publishing.
ISBN 9781465455529.

Hidalgo, Pablo (December 15, 2017).
Star Wars:
The Last Jedi: The Visual Dictionary.
London: DK Publishing.
ISBN 978-1-4654-5551-2.

Johnson, Rian (March 27, 2018).
Star Wars:
The Last Jedi (Blu-ray: Director's commentary track).
Lucasfilm.

Ratcliffe, Amy (October 30, 2018).
Star Wars: Women of the Galaxy.
Chronicle Books.
ISBN 9781452166315.

Reynolds, David; Hidalgo, Pablo (September 18, 2018).
Star Wars: The Complete Visual Dictionary: New Edition.
London: DK Publishing.
ISBN 9781465475473.

Szostak, Phil (December 15, 2017).
The Art of Star Wars: The Last Jedi.
Abrams Books.
ISBN 978-1419727054.

==
External links ==
Rose in the StarWars.com Databank
Rose Tico on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Star Wars:
Bloodline is a Star Wars novel by Claudia Gray, published by Del Rey Books on May 3, 2016.
Set twenty-five years after the events of the 1983 film Return of the Jedi and six years before 2015's The Force Awakens, it follows Leia Organa as she navigates troubles brewing in the Galactic Senate.

The novel was announced in October 2015 at the New York Comic Con panel for the Journey to Star Wars:
The Force Awakens publishing initiative with the title
Star Wars:
New Republic: Bloodline.

==
Plot ==
Now in her late 40s, Senator Leia Organa is frustrated by the stagnation of the New Republic's Galactic Senate, which is troubled by inaction thanks to the rivalry of opposing factions.
The Populists, including Leia, desire that individual planets be autonomous, while the Centrists support a centralized galactic government.
Hearing allegations that the diminishing influence of the tyrannical Hutts has given rise to a dangerous cartel headed by the Nikto crime lord Rinnrivin Di, Leia races to the planet Bastatha to investigate.
To her chagrin, she is accompanied by young Senator Ransolm Casterfo, a priggish Centrist with an idealized view of the fallen Galactic Empire.
As she expected, Leia is abducted by Rinnrivin for a clandestine meeting, where she learns that many Niktos revere her as the "Huttslayer" for her killing of Jabba
the Hutt decades before.
During her escape, Leia and Casterfo find common ground, and soon determine that a shadowy greater power is behind Rinnrivin's expansive operation.

A motion passes in the Senate to potentially create a First Senator position with enhanced powers over the rest.
Leia, the most likely Populist candidate, narrowly escapes a bombing.
Casterfo and Leia's assistant Greer Sonnel discover a sizeable, well funded secret paramilitary organization calling themselves the Amaxines on the obscure planet Daxam IV.
The seemingly frivolous Lady Carise Sindian, a Centrist senator from Arkanis, is actually an agent of the First Order, a clandestine organization made up of Imperial loyalists plotting to depose the New Republic and reclaim control of the galaxy.
She learns the secret that Darth Vader was Leia's father, and uses it to sour Casterfo's growing trust in Leia.
Feeling betrayed, Casterfo makes the secret public, which turns much of the Senate against Leia and effectively ends her candidacy.
Leia leads Greer and the X-wing fighter pilot Joph Seastriker on a mission to infiltrate an Amaxine warrior base on the remote oceanic planet Sibensko, which Leia has connected to Rinnrivin as well.
They discover a massive military force complete with ships and weapons, and Leia's husband Han Solo arrives just in time to aid in her escape.
A firefight results in the destruction of the entire base, but Leia and her team flee with evidence that Rinnrivin and the Amaxines were indeed subordinate to a mysterious larger operation.

Leia presents her evidence to the Senate, and is supported by Casterfo.
Furious, Carise and her faction frame him as a supporter of the Amaxines, and he is arrested for treason.
Knowing Casterfo faces the death penalty on his home planet of Riosa but powerless to save him, Leia realizes that the Senate is too corrupt to be saved.
She calls together some old friends—including Admiral Ackbar and Nien Nunb—as well as Greer, Joph and new "recruits" such as Snap Wexley and Dr. Kalonia to form the Resistance, an underground movement to investigate and fight against the forces amassing to threaten peace in the galaxy.

==
Publication ==
With the 2012 acquisition of Lucasfilm by The Walt Disney Company, most of the licensed Star Wars novels and comics produced since the originating 1977 film Star Wars were rebranded as Star Wars Legends and declared non-canon to the franchise in April 2014.
A new series of novels, aligned with the continuity of the films and the canon TV series The Clone Wars and Star Wars Rebels, began publication in September 2014.
Bloodline was announced as Star Wars: New Republic:
Bloodline in October 2015 at the New York Comic Con panel for the Journey to Star Wars:
The Force Awakens publishing initiative.
An excerpt was released on February 4, 2016, and the novel was published by Del Rey Books on May 3, 2016.
Several key plot elements, including Leia being discredited after her identity as Darth Vader's daughter becomes public knowledge, originated with Michael Arndt during the early development of the then-untitled The Force Awakens film.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Bloodline on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Cara Dune is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise, appearing in the Disney+ television series The Mandalorian.
She was portrayed in the show's first two seasons by actress and former mixed martial artist Gina Carano.
The character is a former Rebel shock trooper who became a mercenary after the Galactic Civil War, and is later employed as a marshal of the New Republic.
A highly trained and battle-hardened special forces warrior, Cara is skilled in the use of weaponry, hand-to-hand combat, and battle tactics, and has an intense hatred of the Galactic Empire for its destruction of her homeworld, Alderaan.
Carano described Cara as a loner who is having trouble readjusting to society following her career as a soldier.

The character has been received positively by reviewers and fans, and has been described as a feminist role model, unique among the Star Wars franchise's female characters due to her physicality and combat skills.
In February 2021, following a series of controversial posts by Carano on social media, Lucasfilm announced that she would not return as Cara and that the character would not be recast.

==
Appearances ==


===
Backstory ===
In the first-season finale, Cara's full given name is revealed to be Carasynthia, and her homeworld to be Alderaan, the planet destroyed by the Death Star in the first Star Wars (1977) film.
She is a former shock trooper from the Rebel Alliance, who fought against the Galactic Empire in the Galactic Civil War depicted in the original Star Wars trilogy, and helped establish the New Republic following that conflict.
In exposition from The Mandalorian, Cara reveals that most of her past work as a Rebel soldier involved eliminating Imperial warlords and other remnants of the Empire following the destruction of the second Death Star.
As a shock trooper, she was dropped behind enemy lines with no support, and cause as much damage as possible (comparable to the real-world US Navy SEALs or even the British SAS).

The dialogue also establishes that she left the Alliance after her role shifted to a more political "peacekeeping" role, such as protecting delegates and suppressing riots, which Cara said was "not what I signed up for".
After taking what she calls "early retirement" from her military position, she became a mercenary, and began drifting from planet to planet.
She eventually became wanted for unknown reasons, leading her to hide out on the forest planet of Sorgan.
===
Season 1 ===
Cara made her first appearance in "Chapter 4: Sanctuary", the fourth episode of The Mandalorian.
On the planet Sorgan, she meets the show's title character, a bounty hunter known simply as the Mandalorian, and each wrongly believes the other one was attempting to collect a bounty on each other.
This results in the two briefly engaging in hand-to-hand combat during their first encounter, ending in a stalemate.
They reconcile and ultimately join forces to defend a village against a ravaging band of raiders of the Klatooinian species.
Cara and the Mandalorian help prepare defensive obstacles and protective positions throughout the village, as well as train the villagers for combat.
Lacking sufficient weapons to take down the raiders' AT-ST, they develop a plan to use the environment of the village, digging ponds deep enough for the walker to collapse after stepping into them.
These measures prove effective during the battle, but when the AT-ST fails to advance far enough to fall into the pond traps, Cara successfully lures it forward by leaping into the pond herself and attacking it at close range.
When the walker moves forward to target her and becomes stuck, the Mandalorian destroys it with a thermal detonator.
After the battle, Cara saves the life of Grogu, aka "The Child", a young alien creature under the Mandalorian's protection, when she finds and kills a bounty hunter just before it is about to execute Grogu.
As a result, the Mandalorian realizes he must take Grogu away from Sorgan, and he invites Cara to come along with them, but she declines.
Cara reappears in the episode "Chapter 7:
The Reckoning", when the Mandalorian recruits her for a mission to the planet Nevarro to eliminate an Imperial presence there.
When he first finds her, she is participating in fights with challengers for money.
Cara is initially reluctant to leave Sorgan, but when the Mandalorian explains that the targets are Imperials, she immediately agrees.
While traveling to Nevarro on the Mandalorian's ship, she participates in a friendly arm wrestling match with him, but Grogu mistakes her actions as aggressive and uses the Force to choke her, only stopping after the Mandalorian intervenes.
During their journey, Cara and the Mandalorian's party are attacked by a group of pterodactyl-like creatures, which they repel after taking casualties.
The bounty hunter Greef Karga is critically injured and Cara attempts to apply first aid, but Grogu uses the Force to heal him.
Later, Greef reveals the mission is an ambush, after which the Mandalorian is to be killed and Grogu given over to the Imperials.
Cara, the Mandalorian, and Greef instead devise a new plan: they will leave Grogu behind, bring the Mandalorian to the Imperials as if he is a prisoner, and then eliminate them.
The plan goes wrong, resulting in the trio becoming pinned down inside a cantina by Imperial officer Moff Gideon and his stormtroopers.
At the start of the first-season finale "Chapter 8: Redemption", the group engages in a brief gunfight with the stormtroopers after IG-11, the bounty hunter droid, arrives with Grogu to provide assistance.
The Mandalorian is badly injured during the fight, and Cara drags him back into the cantina to safety.
The group escapes the building via the sewer system, and flee on a droid-controlled floating barge on a river of lava.
Cara is present when IG-11 sacrifices himself to eliminate a large number of stormtroopers to ensure the group's escape, and she survives an attack by Moff Gideon in a TIE fighter, which the Mandalorian repels.
Afterward, Cara decides to stay on Nevarro to help eliminate any remaining Imperial presence on the planet, and Greef invites her to work as his enforcer, which she appears to accept.

===
Season 2 ===
The character was confirmed to return for the second season of The Mandalorian ahead of its premiere.
She appears in "Chapter 12: The Siege", as the marshal of Nevarro and working with Greef to eliminate the remaining Imperial forces on Nevarro.
When the Mandalorian and Grogu return to Nevarro for repairs to the Razor Crest, they ask him to help them destroy the last Imperial base on the planet in exchange for the repairs.
The base turns out to have more than just a skeleton crew, as the group find numerous stormtroopers patrolling its corridors.
They deactivate the lava cooling system, so that the natural lava flows will destroy the base.
During their escape, the group find scientists and vats of what appear to be cloned bodies.
The scientists attempt to destroy the evidence, but they uncover a recording from Dr. Pershing that reveals he had been transfusing Grogu's blood, which has a high 'M-count', into test subjects.
Stormtroopers soon swarm the team and they are forced to escape before the lava overheats and destroys the base.

The Mandalorian flies from the base to retrieve his ship, using his jetpack, while Cara, and the others escape in a stormtrooper transport.
A chase ensues between the transport, driven by Cara, and speeder bikes manned by scout troopers.
Greef kills the last scout trooper, but TIE fighters launched from the base chase after them, disabling the transport's cannon.
The base soon explodes due to the overheating of the lava.
As the TIE fighters close in on Cara, Greef and Mythrol,
the Razor Crest appears and destroys the Imperials.
After the Mandalorian departs, Greef is visited by New Republic pilots to invite him to help stop whatever the Empire is planning.
One of the pilots, Captain Carson Teva, speaks with Cara and makes her the same offer, mentioning Alderaan's destruction by the Empire, to which she replies that she lost everything with it.

In "Chapter 15:
The Believer", the Mandalorian returns to Nevarro to find Cara to be serving as a Marshal for the New Republic.
Cara secures the release of prisoner Migs Mayfeld to assist the Mandalorian in a mission to infiltrate an imperial base and locate Moff Gideon.
Cara joins the mission, acting as sniper alongside Fennec Shand.
After the mission she agrees to let Mayfeld go free, and assures him he will be declared dead.
In "Chapter 16:
The Rescue", Cara helps the Mandalorian and his allies intercept Dr. Pershing's transport, during which one of the ship's pilots taunts Cara about the destruction of Alderaan before being shot dead.
She later teams up with Fennec, Bo-Katan Kryze, and Koska Reeves to take over the bridge of Moff Gideon's cruiser as a distraction while the Mandalorian rescues Grogu and defeats Gideon.
When Luke Skywalker arrives, Cara prevents the captured Gideon from committing suicide, and knocks him unconscious.

== Characterization ==
Cara Dune is a battle-hardened warrior, with a tough and aggressive personality, but also a kindness beneath her gruff exterior.
Gina Carano, the actress and former mixed martial artist who plays the character, said Cara and the Mandalorian are similar in personality and background, and that the two understand each other and were able to form a bond as a result.
A highly trained fighter, she is muscular, an extremely accurate shot, and has excellent hand-to-hand combat skills, as shown immediately in her fight with the Mandalorian when Cara is first introduced.
She is one of the few in the show who is able to match the Mandalorian in direct combat.
Carano called Cara as "a bit of a loner", who is having trouble reintegrating herself into society following her combat experience.
The fact that she mistakes the Mandalorian for attempting to collect a bounty on her during their first meeting indicates she has done some unsavory things since leaving the military; Carano said of this: "I feel like she's always in trouble.
"
As a soldier, Cara enjoyed the adrenaline of war, and when that disappeared during peace time, she found herself disillusioned with her new role.
Carano has said Cara is questioning whether she agreed with everything that occurred during her military service, and that her experiences at war taken a psychological toll on her.
When introduced in The Mandalorian, Cara kept to herself, did not easily trust others, and cared about little except her survival, keeping her skills sharp, and killing Imperials.
However, she also has a strong sense of loyalty, as shown by her refusal to abandon the Mandalorian after he is seriously injured in the first-season finale.
Cara has an intense hatred for the Empire, which is driven in large part by its role in the destruction of her home planet of Alderaan.
The Angry Staff Officer, an anonymous Army National Guard officer who writes for Wired magazine, has called Cara one of the more tactically-proficient characters in Star Wars.
He called Cara perhaps "the one person in the Star Wars universe to actually absorb some lessons learned" from her past combat engagements.
The writer described the defensive measure the Mandalorian and Cara develop to protect the village in "Chapter 4: Sanctuary" as a "near-perfect defensive engagement", and praised Cara's efforts in luring the AT-ST into a vulnerable position, as well as the way she and the villagers quickly identified their priorities of work, such as establishing obstacles, building protective positions, and training the villagers to fight.
In another example, he cited a scene in the first-season finale in which Cara assists an injured Mandalorian by dragging him into cover for assessment while providing covering fire.
He said other Star Wars characters in this situation have simply tended to the victim in the middle of the firefight, a dangerous scenario, while Cara's method is safer method recommended by the United States Armed Forces.
He wrote: "Cara Dune would receive a 'go' for all the performance measures for this U.S. Army medical task."
==
Concept and creation ==


===
Conception ===
The character of Cara Dune was conceived by Jon Favreau, the creator and showrunner of The Mandalorian.
According to Carano, Favreau created the character with Carano specifically in mind and did not audition any other actresses for the part.
Carano said Favreau sought to make a strong and independent character, but one different from Princess Leia or other powerful female characters previously featured in the franchise: "He wanted my character to be this new soldier of women, and he wanted her to have an impact".
Favreau said it was the type of character he always wished to portray as an actor himself, describing her as "raising the stakes and raising hell".
The writers checked with executive producer Dave Filoni, who had been involved in past
Star Wars works, to make sure the Rebel shock trooper position was consistent with the past continuity of the franchise.
False rumors had circulated on the Internet about what type of character Cara would be prior to any official announcements about her were made public.
Cara Dune was first publicly unveiled during the Star Wars Celebration convention in Chicago on April 14, 2019, along with the character Greef Karga.
The event also featured teaser footage with Cara, a still photo of the character, and included a panel discussion with Carano and Carl Weathers, the actor who portrays Greef, talking about their characters.
Cara was subsequently featured prominently in posters, commercials, and marketing materials in advance of the release of The Mandalorian.
On September 4, Entertainment Weekly unveiled an exclusive photo of Cara and the Mandalorian fighting together, and on October 28, a character poster of The Mandalorian solely featuring Cara Dune was released.
===
Portrayal ===
Carano's casting was first announced on December 12, 2018, though the news had been leaked on the Internet before the formal announcement.
The production of The Mandalorian called for more secrecy than any other job of Carano's career.
Prior to filming one of Cara's first scenes, Carano said Favreau told her that playing this character was going to change Carano's career trajectory, giving her more self-confidence as an actress providing her the opportunity to play stronger roles in the future.
Carano said she had a strong positive emotional reaction to the conversation, and that it helped her play the role of Cara Dune more confidently, saying: "I feel like my whole life since I shot
that has been a different world."
Carano credited Bryce Dallas Howard, who directed the first episode featuring Cara, with helping Carano determine how to best translate the character from the script to the screen during their work together in Cara's debut episode.
In February 2021, Lucasfilm announced that Carano would no longer portray the character, citing social media posts which they said "denigrat[ed] people based on their cultural and religious identities", and that the character would not be recast.

===
Costume ===
Cara Dune's costume was designed by concept artist Brian Matyas and costume designer Joseph Porro.
Gina Carano said she was impressed by the amount of detail the crew of The Mandalorian achieved in their costuming, saying of them: "These people are legit."
The costume is mostly black, with armor pieces on the chest and shoulders showing wear from battle damage, and Three lines with black and silver bars running across the sternum.
The costume includes two thick belts, one black and one green, as well as holsters for blasters and knives, and a brace on the right knee.
The costume also includes thick black gloves metal on the fingers and knuckles, as well as wrist armor and large black boots.
The creation of Cara's costume began with a mold being made of Carano's body, a process she did not enjoy.
The shoulders were built out and the waist cinched in, to create a distinctive hourglass-shaped silhouette for the character.
The Mandalorian executive producer Kathleen Kennedy had stressed the importance of Cara having a distinctive silhouette because she felt all Star Wars characters should be recognizable from a great distance.
Jon Favreau, Bryce Dallas Howard, and Dave Filoni provided input on the costume, with Howard in particular making suggestions about how to convey toughness without sacrificing femininity, while also ensuring Carano would be able to perform the athletic feats required of the character.
Carano stressed the importance of this: "How do you put basically football padding on a busty curvy female?
I didn't want to be a block.
I didn't want to just be this like big, buff refrigerator.
"Cara's hairstyle was originally planned to be short, with one side completely buzzed, but Carano objected to this because she wanted to maintain the character's femininity.
Maria Sandoval, who described Cara as her favorite character on the show, instead developed a shoulder-length hairstyle with rough edges.
The hairstyle was partially inspired by that of director Deborah Chow, who had directed several The Mandalorian first-season episodes.
Howard said while she and the producers of the series were discussing Cara's costume, they observed Chow directing and noticed the way her hair was gathered and stylized with braids, and elements of it were factored into Cara Dune's hairstyle.
Cara was provided a blaster prop similar in appearance to the firearm used by Han Solo in the Star Wars films.
The character also has a handful of tattoos, including a small Rebel Alliance insignia under the left eye, and a series of tattoos and bars around her that signify her as a veteran of the Rebellion, something that had been featured on characters on the animated television series Star Wars: The Clone Wars.
Carano said the Rebel insignia tattoo in particular has a deeper back story that will be revealed later in future seasons.
The costume was on display at the D23 Expo in Anaheim, California in August 2019.

===
Filming ===
Cara Dune's scenes were filmed in a studio in Manhattan Beach, California.
Favreau and Filoni discussed elements of Cara's back story with Carano before filming to help inform her performance, and just before filming the introductory scene of Cara's debut episode, Favreau shared secrets about the character that would not be revealed until later in the series.
Carano said having this information helped inform her performance and "added so much depth to what her life has been like".
Carano said she enjoyed performing against lead actor Pedro Pascal, who plays the Mandalorian, and other masked characters in the show, and she said it was easy for her to do so because, in her everyday life, "I don't naturally see what somebody's physical appearance is.
I instantly kind of feel who a person is"; as a result, she said she could often tell what faces Pascal was making or what emotions he was expressing beneath the mask, despite not seeing his face.
Pascal said of working with her: "I couldn't feel in better hands than in the hands of Gina Carano."

Carano said Howard listened to her thoughts and ideas during the filming of Cara's first episode, watched replays with her after shooting scenes, and communicated with her as a fellow actress.
Carano said of Howard: "She was very motherly and protective of our performances."
Howard also allowed Carano to have as many takes as she needed to get the performance right, which the actress said put her at ease.
During Carano's first day of filming, she was required to ride the mechanical blurrg, a reptilian mounted creature that was so large she needed a ladder to climb atop it.
Pascal was unavailable for many of her scenes on "Chapter 4: Sanctuary" because he was auditioning for another series, so Howard mostly worked with Pascal's body double.
As a result, she called Carano "the face of the episode".
The actress had a stomach flu when her scenes fighting the AT-ST were filmed, which along with two nights of rain in advance of the shoot made the scene very challenging.
Her introductory scene in which the Mandalorian and Cara fight each other was originally written differently, but it was changed on the set by Favreau and Howard as the stunt team worked on choreography and previsualization.
Carano said one of the changes was "we made it to where she got the jump on him.
"Carano said the set of The Mandalorian is "not a green screen set", but rather is very realistic, even with the alien characters and other fantasy elements.
She said this helps her performance and has been "an incredible blessing for my imagination".
According to Carano, she passed out twice while filming the scene in "Chapter 7:
The Reckoning" when Grogu uses the Force to choke her.
On March 6, 2020, Carano posted an Instagram photo of herself in the Cara Dune costume on the set of The Mandalorian to mark the end of filming for the second season, writing: "I absolutely love this work and the people in it."
===
Stunts ===
Carano collaborated and worked closely with The Mandalorian stunt team, and she believed they "accepted me as one of their own", in part due to her mixed martial arts background.

She said the stunt team "have been like brothers and sisters to me".

Carano performed many of the stunts herself.

For example, Carano herself drags a wounded comrade off a battlefield during one of her scenes, which surprised many of the bystanders on the set.

Carano also outpaced Pascal's stunt double in one scene, and in another she sent a stunt performer flying across the set due to the force of one of her kicks.
Carano believed her fighting scenes were aided not only by her mixed martial arts skills, but also her training in ballet, jazz dancing, and tap dancing as a child.

She said some fighters have trouble transitioning into acting because they want to appear tough and have trouble performing in scenes in which they lose fights or take hits, but Carano said her early arts training helped her avoid that.

==
Cultural impact ==


===
Critical reception ===
Gina Carano has been received positively by reviews and fans.
She said most of the feedback about the character she has heard and read online has been positive, adding: "I have so many people who are rooting for this strong female character."
Olivia Luchini of PopSugar called her a character "worthy of riotous applause" and a feminist role model, calling her unique even among the Star Wars franchise's strong female characters due to her physicality and combat skills.
Luchini says Cara serves as a role model particularly for female fans who consider themselves "a little rugged and audacious", writing: "She is a breath of fresh air for those who haven't been able to see themselves in the Star Wars universe quite yet."
Megan Crouse of Den of Geek called Cara one of the show's best characters, particularly praising the "great platonic chemistry" between her and the Mandalorian.
Crouse said Carano fully inhabits the character that she elevates the script.
Variety writer Will Thorne praised Cara Dune, complimenting her combat skills and "debonair charm", and compared her to the Marvel Comics character Gamora as performed by Zoe Saldana in the Guardians of the Galaxy films.
Vanity Fair writer Joanna Robinson called the character a "prime showcase for Carano" and the first role to capitalize on her "real-life, distinct blend of inherent sweetness and physical toughness".
Screen Rant writer Kevin Pantoja called Carano brings a "legitimate physical presence" to the role, and that Cara stands out in a franchise that already includes such strong female protagonists as Princess Leia and Rey.
Erik Kain of Forbes called Cara a great character and said he wishes she was featured even more prominently in the series.
She ranked fourth on a Screen Rant list of the most interesting characters from the first season of The Mandalorian, fifth on a separate list of the ten best characters from the show, and her costume was ranked third on a list of the ten best costumes in the first season.
Several fans have produced artwork of the character and dressed as her in cosplay, and some have gotten the Rebel Alliance tattoo that Cara has under her eye.
Some Star Wars fans were critical of the Cara Dune character because they perceived the presence of a strong female fighter as "forced diversity" and "wokeness", according to Anthony Gramuglia of Comic Book Resources.
Gramuglia calls these objections misogynist and "patently ridiculous", comparing them to complaints about other female Star Wars characters such as Rey, Rose Tico, Jyn Erso, and Qi'ra.
Gramuglia writes: "To them, Cara Dune's presence serves as a means to make men appear weaker by comparison, as she fights battles that most of the male characters aren't capable of undertaking themselves."
===
Merchandise ===
Several toys of Cara Dune were first made available at a Star Wars product launch event called Triple Force Friday on October 4, 2019.
Among them was a six-inch action figure by Hasbro as part of the company's Star Wars:
The Black Series toy line, and Funko Pop figurine, and a Lego minifigure, as well as The Mandalorian t-shirts featuring the character.
Additionally, two more action figures based on the character were about to be released, one of which was reported to have been part of The Black Series 6 line, but production on all Cara Dune toys was cancelled by Hasbro following Carano's firing.

==
References ==


===
Citations ===


===
Works cited ===


==
External links ==
Cara Dune in the StarWars.com Databank
Carasynthia Dune on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
General Armitage Hux is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise.
First introduced in the 2015 film Star Wars: The Force Awakens, he is portrayed by Irish actor Domhnall Gleeson.
He is an unpleasant military commander in a power struggle with Kylo Ren for the First Order leadership, and being exceeded only by Supreme Leader Snoke.
The character first featured in The Force Awakens media and merchandising, and returned in the film's sequels, The Last Jedi (2017) and The Rise of Skywalker (2019).
Gleeson's performance has received generally positive reception from critics and fans, while the reaction to the character and his shifting roles throughout the trilogy has been more mixed.
==
Character ==
Hux was born on Arkanis and was rumored to have been sired from an affair between his father, Commandant Brendol Hux of the Arkanis Academy, and a kitchen worker.
Hux and his father are rescued from the Academy when it is about to fall to the New Republic near the end of the Galactic Civil War.
When the war ends with the Battle of Jakku and the signing of the Galactic Concordance, the young Hux and his father are part of the Imperial Navy forces who retreat into the Unknown Regions.
These forces later emerge as the First Order.
The Republic believes that the First Order is just an unimportant band of Imperial holdouts, but Hux's training methods forge a formidable military that effectively overthrows the Republic and turns the galaxy into a dictatorship even more brutal than the Galactic Empire of the original Star Wars trilogy.
He serves as the right hand of the First Order's Supreme Leader Snoke (Andy Serkis), second in authority only to Kylo Ren (Adam Driver), with whom he has a fierce rivalry.
He is dedicated to destroying the Resistance, an army that grew out of the Rebel Alliance and is led by General Leia Organa (Carrie Fisher).
Hux believes that the Republic is a threat to galactic stability, and that it is his destiny to rule the galaxy.

==
Appearances ==


===
Film ===


====
The Force Awakens (2015) ====
Hux first appears in The Force Awakens as a high-ranking general in the First Order.
Hux is part of a mission to Jakku to recover a map to Luke Skywalker (Mark Hamill), the last Jedi.
After the battle, he learns from Captain Phasma of the desertion of a former stormtrooper, Finn (John Boyega).
To destroy the Resistance, Snoke allows Hux to use the Starkiller superweapon against the Republic's capital world of Hosnian Prime, destroying the planet and killing billions of people.
The Resistance is left without military support from the Republic, so Hux soon turns the Starkiller weapon towards the Resistance base on D'Qar.
Before he can destroy the planet, however, an attack squadron led by Resistance Commander Poe Dameron (Oscar Isaac), with ground support from Han Solo (Harrison Ford), Finn, and the Jakku scavenger Rey (Daisy Ridley), destroys Starkiller Base, forcing Hux, some of his troops, and a defeated Ren to flee the planet.

====
The Last Jedi (2017) ====
Hux appears in The Last Jedi as the primary general reporting directly to Supreme Leader Snoke.
He attempts to respond to a transmission from Dameron, who mocks him by asking for a General "Hugs" and describing his complexion as "pasty".
Hux then leads the subsequent battle, during which both sides sustain heavy losses.
He also oversees the bombardment of the remaining three ships of the Resistance, then on the lifeboats, and, along with Phasma, helps arrange the execution of Finn and Rose.
Later, he discovers Snoke dead and Ren unconscious in the throne room of the Supremacy, so he attempts to kill his rival but stops when Ren wakes up.
He initially protests Ren's claim to be the new Supreme Leader, but is swiftly persuaded otherwise when Ren uses the Force to choke him, proclaiming "Long live the Supreme Leader."
At the end of the film, he accompanies Ren to the planet Crait in their attempt to finish off the Resistance.
When Ren orders his men to fire on Luke, Hux admonishes him to focus on the escaping Resistance members; Ren silences him by using the Force to slam him into a wall, knocking him out.
Hux is seen again when Ren and his troops invade the Resistance base and find it empty, giving Ren a sinister glare from behind.
====
The Rise of Skywalker (2019) ====
By the time of Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker, Hux has become embittered and jealous because of the lack of respect he receives and his rivalry with Allegiant General Pryde (Richard E. Grant), who constantly undermines Hux while vying for his job.
Hux is later revealed to have been a spy supplying information to the Resistance in order to undermine Ren in the hopes of taking his place as Supreme Leader (or at least seeing Ren falling along with the First Order if necessary); he tells Finn, "I don't care if you win.
I need Kylo Ren to lose."
Hux helps Finn, Poe and Chewbacca
escape Ren's Resurgent-class Star Destroyer
Steadfast and has Finn shoot him in the leg so he can feign an effort to stop them.
However, he is shot in the chest with a blaster by Pryde after the latter realizes Hux's treason through his cover story.
Hux’s decision to allow the rebels to escape is a major catalyst for the Resistance's victory in the Battle of Exegol.

A scene deleted from the film featured Hux and Pryde in the opening action sequence with Kylo Ren.
===
Other media ===
Hux appears via hologram in the first season finale of the animated series Star Wars:
Resistance.
The episode takes place at the same time as The Force Awakens and depicts First Order troops watching a transmission of Hux give his speech and the subsequent firing of Starkiller Base.
He appears, in person, in the eleventh episode "Station to Station" of the second season and in hologram in the finale of season two, "The Escape", along with Kylo Ren.

Hux appears in two theme park attractions, Star Tours – The Adventures Continue and Star Wars:
Rise of the Resistance with Gleeson reprising the role in each.
Some details about the backstory of Hux and his father Brendol appear in the 2016 novel Star Wars:
Aftermath:
Life Debt by Chuck Wendig.
Hux and Brendol are also characters in the 2017 novel Star Wars: Phasma by Delilah S. Dawson.
Hux also is a playable Dark Side squad leader in an update to the mobile MOBA Star Wars: Force Arena, released in late 2017.

== Reception ==
In his review of The Force Awakens, Henry Barnes of The Guardian wrote that Gleeson's "screechy pseudo-Nazi role" as General Hux is "not as colourful or as nuanced" as Adam Driver's part as Kylo Ren, "but – given he's a functionary – Gleeson certainly makes an impression."
Reviewing Hux and his role in the film, David Rutz of The Washington Free Beacon wrote that while Hux is portrayed as a villain, he is shown to be a capable general and "a committed soldier to his cause with laser-like focus on achieving the First Order's ends."
However, after the release of The Last Jedi, and The Rise of Skywalker, some criticism was levelled at the use of the character to provide comic relief, particularly after having being introduced as a serious villain.
The character's story arc was also discussed.
The revelation that he was a Resistance spy and his subsequent "unceremonious" death was subject to some criticism.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
General Hux in the StarWars.com Databank
General Hux on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
General Hux on IMDb
Captain Phasma is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise, portrayed by English actress Gwendoline Christie.
Introduced in Star Wars: The Force Awakens (2015), the first film in the Star Wars sequel trilogy
, Phasma is the commander of the First Order's force of stormtroopers.
Christie returned to the role in the next of the trilogy's films, Star Wars: The Last Jedi (2017), and in the animated television series Star Wars Resistance (2018) and several video games.
The character also made an additional appearance in Before the Awakening, an anthology book set before the events of The Force Awakens.

J. J. Abrams created Phasma from an armor design originally developed for Kylo Ren and named her after the 1979 horror film Phantasm.
The character was originally conceived as male.
Phasma appeared prominently in promotion and marketing for The Force Awakens, but the character's ultimately minor role in the film was the subject of criticism, a complaint repeated for her appearance in The Last Jedi.
Nonetheless, merchandise featuring the character found success, and her figure was the best-selling of all The Force
Awakens action figures on Amazon.co.uk.
==
Concept and creation ==
The character's creation was inspired by a rejected design for Kylo Ren.
Costume designer Michael Kaplan came up with the concept of Kylo being "the Lord of the Stormtroopers, in bright shining silver armor".
Kaplan had a strong image in his head of what this concept should look like, which concept
artist Dermot Power turned into an illustration.
This image, however, was immediately rejected by director J. J. Abrams.
Later, producer Kathleen Kennedy found the design, reacting positively and calling it "fantastic".
Abrams then used the design to create a new character, Phasma.
He named Phasma after the 1979 horror film Phantasm because her armor reminded him of the film's spheres.
Kaplan intended for the visuals of the First Order to contrast with that of the Resistance, appearing in colors like "black, teal blue, and steel gray", with stormtroopers being updated to be more simplified and modernized.
Kaplan designed the character believing it would be "extremely cool" to have a silver armored character in the film.
The character was not originally conceived as a woman, but rather was changed from male to female during casting, less than three weeks before principal shooting began.
Phasma thereby became the second on-screen female Star Wars villain, after Zam Wesell.
With Captain Phasma, the filmmakers wished to "push the boundaries" of traditional roles for female characters.
Actress Gwendoline Christie, who had previously played Brienne of Tarth in Game of Thrones, was first officially confirmed as Captain Phasma in a Vanity Fair spread released May 4, 2015, following its leak.
Christie fought heavily to appear in the film, continually insisting her agent get her a part in it.
Christie was not aware that the character was originally a man.
Christie took inspiration from her armor—"it's very high-functioning, it's very imposing
and it's not malleable at all"—in how to play the character.
In playing Phasma, Christie felt encouraged to experiment more with the gesture of a character.
Her initial costume, used in The Force Awakens, had to be created over a period of "four or five days"; co-costume designer Dave Crossman described its physical creation as "a complete panic".
It took Christie roughly forty-five minutes to put on.
A new suit was created for The Last Jedi, with various tweaks.
Its helmet was re-chromed, the fit was altered, and the armor was made "much cleaner and shinier."
==
Character ==
The commander of the First Order's stormtroopers, Captain Phasma is described as a "tough veteran commander" and one of a "commanding triumvirate" of the First Order alongside Kylo Ren and General Hux.
Christie compared Phasma to Boba Fett in the sense of being a character who, while not "at the forefront of the action all the time", still has "a lot of impact".
The actress called the character "a malevolent force" who takes pleasure in her cruelty, something she attributed to a perceived difficult journey to becoming the only female stormtrooper of rank.
To contrast with other stormtroopers in the franchise, Christie portrayed Phasma with both some femininity and sassiness.
Glen Robert Gill, writing for Bright Lights Film Journal, saw Phasma as "the demonic or negative emanation of the maidenly anima".
Phasma is depicted wearing salvaged chromium armor, which in The Force Awakens' visual dictionary is established as coming from a Naboo yacht once owned by Palpatine.
It is said to serve "primarily as a symbol of past power".
Christie recognised the character's helmet as both being futuristic and having medieval elements.
Chris Laverty, creator of costume analysis site Clothes on Film, called her armor "probably the most regal costume" in The Force Awakens, and noted it as a reflection of her status.
He also felt her cloak, "elegantly slung over one shoulder", was a method of humanizing the character.
In-universe, the cloak is the "traditional cape of First Order command".
Gill felt her armor called to mind mirrors, symbols of "self-reflection and self-examination", the feelings she brings in Finn when she inadvertently helps inspire him to defect.

==
Appearances ==


===
Film ===


====
The Force Awakens (2015) ====
The second trailer for the 2015 film Star Wars:
The Force Awakens introduced the character.
In the film, Phasma begins engaged in an attack at Tuanul, a settlement village on the desert planet Jakku, in search of a galaxy map that leads to the last Jedi, Luke Skywalker.
After the battle is won, Phasma and the other stormtroopers execute the remaining villagers.
Back on the Resurgent-class Star Destroyer Finalizer, she meets with stormtrooper FN-2187, and reprimands him for having removed his helmet without permission.
FN-2187
later flees and frees Poe Dameron (who renames him Finn).
Phasma is present when Finn's defection is discovered; she mentions that Finn had never committed any infractions in the past.
Finally, when Finn, Han Solo, and Chewbacca infiltrate Starkiller Base, they take Phasma hostage and pressure her to deactivate the base's shields, intending to drop her in the trash compactor.

====
The Last Jedi (2017) ====
Phasma appears in Star Wars:
The Last Jedi when Finn, mechanic Rose Tico, and computer hacker DJ infiltrate the Mega-class Star Dreadnought Supremacy, a 37.5 miles (60.4 km)-wide flagship, in an attempt to disable the ship's tracking device.
They are captured and brought before Phasma and her stormtroopers.
Phasma taunts Finn, and orders his execution with Rose in a "slow and painful" way.
Before this can occur, Vice Admiral Holdo plummets the MC85 Star Cruiser Raddus, her two-mile-long cruiser, into the First Order fleet at lightspeed.
In the ensuing chaos, Phasma and Finn fight.
At first, Phasma gets the upper hand, knocking Finn into a pit.
Finn emerges unharmed from the pit, riding its elevator; he knocks Phasma down, breaking the visor of her helmet, and exposing part of her face around the left eye.
The turf crumbles beneath Phasma, and she falls into the flames.

In a deleted scene, the battle with Phasma and her fate are significantly different: She and four stormtroopers manage to surround Finn, who taunts Phasma about her compliance to his demands in The Force Awakens.
Before the stormtroopers can turn on her, Phasma kills all of them and then prepares to attack Finn, but he manages to cut her hand off and blasts her into the ship's wreckage.

The Last Jedi director Rian Johnson said that Phasma's limited supporting role in the film was due to time constraints and an already large cast of characters, and indicated that there were no other plans for Phasma in the films.
Though Phasma's fate was left unknown and the possibility of her returning in Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker was hinted, John Boyega confirmed at the Episode IX panel during Celebration Chicago that Phasma indeed died in The Last Jedi, officially confirming her death.

===
Television ===
Phasma appears in the 2018 animated series Star Wars Resistance, voiced by Gwendoline Christie.

===
Literature ===
Before the Awakening, a prequel anthology, features the character in a short story centered around Finn.
In it, she monitors Finn's performance in combat simulation and, although praising his skill, she criticizes his rescuing of a weaker soldier.
Additionally, Phasma is featured in both the adult and junior novelizations of The Force Awakens.

In the lead-up to The Last Jedi's release, Phasma's backstory was explored in Star Wars: Phasma, a novel by Delilah S. Dawson.
Though Phasma's origins and character are discussed, the novel is not told from Phasma's perspective.

====
Comics ====
A four-part comic miniseries, Star Wars: Captain Phasma, was announced in April 2017 as part of the Journey to Star Wars:
The Last Jedi initiative.
The series was written by Kelly Thompson with art by Marco Checchetto, and published by Marvel Comics between September 6 and October 18, 2017.
It explains Phasma's escape from Starkiller Base during the climax of The Force Awakens, and subsequent events.
She pursues loose ends while framing Lieutenant Sol Rivas for lowering the shields to the First Order's superweapon.
Her pursuit takes her to the planet Luprora after she requisitions a TIE fighter, its pilot, and an astromech droid.
In a flashback in issue #3, Phasma mentions Siv, a character from the 2017 novel Phasma.
Reviewing for IGN, Jesse Schedeen wrote that Thompson's "efficient approach to storytelling, coupled with the gorgeous tag-team combo that is Marco Checchetto and Andres Mossa, makes this a Star Wars comic every Phasma fan should read."
===
Other media ===
The Lego Star Wars version of Phasma also appears in the 2016 short form animated series Lego Star Wars: The Resistance Rises.
She is also a playable character and boss in the Lego video game adaptation of The Force Awakens.

===
Merchandise ===
As part of the lead-up to the film, Disney released a wave of Star Wars toys on 2015's "Force Friday".
One such toy was a Phasma voice-changing mask, which contained the first dialogue heard by the public.
Other items included a costume for children as well as action figures.

== Reception ==
Phasma received attention before release.
Before her name was confirmed, Phasma had been dubbed "the Chrometrooper" by fans.
The trademarking of "Captain Phasma" led to speculation that it was the name of Christie's rumored character, said to be an Imperial officer pursuing Finn.
Phasma had been the name of a character in one Star Wars fanfic, Tarkin's Fist, leading to MovieWeb
wondering if it was an intentional homage.
IGN's "Keepin' It Reel" podcast discussed the possibility of Phasma being "the next breakout baddie" in the vein of Boba Fett and Darth Maul.
They responded positively to the character's name, despite some initial misgivings, for fitting in with the franchise's Flash Gordon roots.
They also praised her armor design, stating that character design had been important in the success of Fett and Maul.
They similarly had high hopes for Christie's acting.
During the lead-up to the film, Phasma became a fan favorite.
Polygon's Susana Polo considered The Force Awakens a great achievement for Hollywood for its diversity regardless of its quality, though she used Phasma as an example of how the film was not perfect, noting rumors of Phasma's minor role despite her being the first on-screen female stormtrooper.
Upon The Force Awakens' release, criticism fell on the character's minimal role in the film.
The Telegraph's Jonathan McAloon called his "one criticism" of The Force Awakens the underuse of Phasma, and wondered if her face would ever be revealed in the films.
Jason Guerrasio of Business Insider echoed the sentiment, noting her lack of screen time despite her great potential.
Scott Meslow, writing for The Week, criticized the film's lack of nuance in its villains, calling her "a total cipher" in the film despite her heavy appearance in its promotion.
He pointed to her appearance in Before the Awakening as a way to expand her character, noting her cold yet logical pragmatism in it.
Jesse Schedeen of IGN called Phasma "something of a disappointment in The Force Awakens", negatively contrasting her against Fett in that "even Fett had the distinction of outsmarting Han Solo before meeting an ignominious end".
Schedeen hoped Phasma would be revisited in Marvel's Star Wars comics, to help flesh out her character and build her into a better villain.
Max Nicholson, writing for Collider, noted the amount of hype for the character, as well as her minimal role in the story.
Nicholson suggested that Hux and Phasma should have been merged into one character, as they were too similar, or Phasma should have been given the melee fight scene given to a trooper nicknamed "TR-8R" by fans.
Bill Keveney of USA Today negatively compared Phasma's skill as a warrior to Christie's character Brienne of Tarth from Game of Thrones.
He further criticized Phasma's role in The Force Awakens by attributing the First Order's defeat to being largely her fault, as well as her "recycled" appearance in The Last Jedi.
Merchandise featuring the character proved popular.
David Betancourt of The Washington Post called Phasma's role in the film "little more than a shiny new prop", viewing her as a victim of the film's need to introduce all its new characters, yet noted the popularity and rarity of the merchandise surrounding the character.
Captain Phasma's figure was the bestselling of The Force Awakens' action figures on Amazon.co.uk.
==
References ==


==
External links ==
Captain Phasma in the StarWars.com Databank
Phasma on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Captain Phasma on IMDb
Greef Karga is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise who appears in the Disney+ television series The Mandalorian.
He is a leader of the Bounty Hunters' Guild, and provides the show's title character with the bounty that leads him to meet Grogu, an alien infant also known as "The Child".
Greef serves as both an ally and adversary to the Mandalorian at different points in the first season, and returns as an ally in the second season.

Greef Karga was created by Jon Favreau, the creator and showrunner of The Mandalorian.
The character was originally planned only to appear in a handful of episodes, but Favreau and the writers liked the character so much that the part was expanded.
Greef is portrayed by Carl Weathers, whom Favreau knew through the Directors Guild of America.
Weathers accepted the part under the condition that he could direct future episodes of The Mandalorian; Weathers directed the episode "Chapter 12: The Siege", which was Greef's first appearance in the show's second season.

Elements of the character's background have deliberately been kept mysterious, though it was revealed in the first-season finale that he was previously a disgraced government official, and Weathers said his backstory will be further developed in the second season.
Weathers performs his own stunts for The Mandalorian.
He has described the role as "one of the greatest things that's happened in all of the years that I've been in entertainment".
Greef has received generally positive feedback from fans and reviewers.

==
Appearances ==


===
Backstory ===
Greef Karga is a leader of the Bounty Hunters' Guild, an organization that regulates the activities of bounty hunters, assigns bounties to specific individuals, and ensures its members follow the guild's rules.
Little of Greef's backstory has been revealed as of the end of the first season, but in the first-season finale, it is revealed he was previously a government official with the title "magistrate" before losing the position in disgrace.
Carl Weathers, the actor who portrays Greef, has said additional backstory details will be provided in the show's second season.

===
Season 1 ===
Greef first appears in the series premiere, "Chapter 1:
The Mandalorian", where he operates out of a bar on the planet Nevarro.
He is first seen when the Mandalorian collects payment from him for several bounties he collected.
Greef then informs the Mandalorian about a lucrative job from a mysterious man known only as "The Client", who insists on meeting with the Mandalorian face to face.
This job turns out to be a bounty against Grogu, aka "The Child", a young alien of the same unnamed species as Yoda.
Greef
next appears in "Chapter 3: The Sin", during which he informs the Mandalorian to bring the captured Grogu directly to the Client.
The Mandalorian does so, only to later rescue Grogu back from the Client, who is an agent of the Galactic Empire.
This is a violation of the Bounty Hunters' Guild code, so Greef organizes a group of bounty hunters to confront the Mandalorian and get Grogu back.
A massive gunfight ensues, in which most of Greef's bounty hunters are killed when the Mandalorian receives assistance from a group of fellow Mandalorian warriors.
Greef himself escapes and confronts the Mandalorian at his ship, the Razor Crest, but the Mandalorian shoots him off his boarding ramp before flying away.
Greef only survives because he had two ingots of beskar, a rare steel which the Client provided as payment for the Grogu's bounty, inside his vest pocket where he was shot.
The season's penultimate episode, "Chapter 7:
The Reckoning", opens with the Mandalorian receiving a message from Greef, who proposes that if the Mandalorian helps eliminate the Imperial presence on Nevarro, Greef will ensure the Bounty Hunters' Guild no longer seeks out the Mandalorian or Grogu.
The offer is a trap, and Greef plans to ambush and kill the Mandalorian and return Grogu to the Client.
Nevertheless, the Mandalorian accepts Greef's offer, bringing along with him Cara Dune, Kuiil, and IG-11 to assist in the mission.
During their voyage, the party is attacked by pterodactyl-like creatures, and Greef receives a poisonous slash that would have been fatal, but Grogu uses the Force to heal him.
Greef is so moved that he has a change of heart and informs the others about the trap.
They devise a new plan in which they leave Grogu behind, bring the Mandalorian to the Imperials as if he is a prisoner, and then attempt to eliminate them.
The plan goes wrong, resulting in the trio becoming pinned down inside a bar by Imperial officer Moff Gideon and his stormtroopers.
At the start of the first-season finale "Chapter 8: Redemption", the group engages in a brief gunfight with the stormtroopers after the IG-11 arrives with Grogu to provide assistance.
The group escapes the building via the sewer system, where they travel to a hidden Mandalorian convert and find most of the warriors there have already been killed by the Empire.
The Mandalorian initially blames Greef for this, believing the Bounty Hunters' Guild responsible, until a fellow Mandalorian leader known as the Armorer persuades him otherwise.
The group then flees on a droid-controlled floating barge on a river of lava.
Greef is present when IG-11 sacrifices himself to eliminate a large number of stormtroopers to ensure the group's escape, and he survives an attack by Moff Gideon in a TIE fighter, which the Mandalorian repels.
Afterward, Greef decides to stay behind on Nevarro and rebuild the Bounty Hunters' Guild, and he invites Cara Dune to work as his enforcer, which she accepts.

===
Season 2 ===
The character was confirmed to return in the second season of The Mandalorian ahead of its premiere.
Greef appears in "Chapter 12: The Siege", the first episode in the show directed by Carl Weathers.
Now the magistrate of Nevarro, he worked to eliminate all Imperial forces on the planet, aided by Cara as his marshal and an unnamed Mythrol as his assistant.
When the Mandalorian and Grogu return to Nevarro for repairs to the Razor Crest, they reunite with Greef and Cara, who present to them some of the changes made to the place, before inviting the former to join them on a raid on the last Imperial base on the planet in exchange for the repairs.
The base turns out to have more than just a skeleton crew, as the group find numerous stormtroopers patrolling its corridors.
They deactivate the lava cooling system, so that the natural lava flows will destroy the base.
During their escape, the group find scientists and vats of what appear to be cloned bodies.
The scientists attempt to destroy the evidence, but before they can do so, the Mythrol uncovers a recording from Dr. Pershing that reveals he had been transfusing Grogu's blood, which has a high 'M-count' into test subjects.
Stormtroopers soon swarm the team and they are forced to escape before the lava overheats and destroys the base.

The Mandalorian flies from the base to retrieve his ship, using his jetpack, whilst
Greef, Cara and Mythrol steal a stormtrooper transport.
A chase ensues between the transport, driven by Cara, and speeder bikes manned by scout troopers.
Greef kills the last scout trooper, but TIE fighters launched from the base chase after them, disabling the transport's cannon.
The base soon explodes due to the overheating of the lava.
As the TIE fighters close in on Greef, Cara and Mythrol, the Razor Crest appears and destroys the Imperials.
After the Mandalorian receives the promised repairs to his ship and departs from Nevarro once again with Grogu, Greef is visited by New Republic pilots, who invite him to help stop whatever the Empire is planning.

== Characterization ==
Greef Karga has a gruff personality, and a no-nonsense approach to business.
He projects a calm and confident demeanor, and is motivated largely by financial profit, but is also fair in his dealings.
He is loyal to his allies to some degree, but can also be duplicitous and shifting in his allegiances, as seen by the way in which he repeatedly switches between friend and adversary to the Mandalorian.
Anthony Breznican of Vanity Fair felt Greef simultaneously protected and manipulated the Mandalorian at times, and that Mandalorian did not fully trust him as a result.
Weathers has described his character as "a combination of a used car salesman and a puppeteer".
KGO-TV writers Janet Davies and Marsha Jordan described Greef as a "shadowy underworld figure".
Weathers said the character has "something that you can't quite trust", but also said he is "definitely not amoral".
Greef is a mysterious character, and Weathers has said it was a conscious decision by the writers to keep aspects of his history and motivations cryptic:
"There's some real strong indications that give you some idea of who he is, but we never let on completely."
Greef has a very theatrical and sometimes over-the-top personality, enjoys action and the company of bounty hunters, over whom he exerts strict control through his leadership role in the Bounty Hunters' Guild.
Although normally self-assured and confident, Greef does act cautiously and sometimes even fearfully in some situations, such as his interaction with the Client.

==
Concept and creation ==


===
Conception ===
The character of Greef Karga was created by Jon Favreau, the creator and showrunner of The Mandalorian.
He was originally planned to make a brief appearance in the series, but Favreau and the series writers found that they liked the character so much that they expanded his part and gave him a larger role.
Greef Karga was first publicly unveiled during the Star Wars Celebration convention in Chicago on April 14, 2019, along with the character Cara Dune.
The event also featured teaser footage featuring Greef, a still photo of the character, and included a panel discussion with Weathers and Gina Carano, the actress who portrays Cara, discussing their characters.
A full finished scene of Greef offering a bounty to the Mandalorian was also screened.
It was the first time Weathers had seen finalized footage from the show, after which he said: "How can you not react to that?
It's beautiful hearing the fans react to it.
"During
the panel, Weathers said of his character: "He's kind of the head of this guild of bounty hunters.
There seems to be a lot of kind of nefarious people."
Some publications misspelled Karga's named after the event, with Anthony Gramuglia of Comic Book Resources calling him "Greif Marda", and Variety writer Jordan Moreau misspelling the last name as "Carga".
Further footage of the character was included in the first trailer of The Mandalorian.
which debuted at the D23 convention on August 23, 2019.
According to Adrienne Tyler of Screen Rant, some viewers mistook images of Greef Carga in the trailer for Lando Calrissian, a Star Wars character who dates back to the original Star Wars trilogy.
On October 28, a character poster of The Mandalorian solely featuring Greef Karga was released.

===
Portrayal ===
Jon Favreau, who offered the part to Weathers, was a fan of the actor and had previously met Weathers through their mutual membership in the Directors Guild of America; Favreau began courting him for The Mandalorian early in the process of preparing for the series.
Weathers said Favreau "did sort of a slow roll on me", describing the project to him and impressing the actor with his passion for the show.
Weathers met with Favreau to discuss the Greef Karga character, with Favreau showing him concept art from the series, which Weathers described as "magnificent" and "some of the most beautiful artwork".
He was also impressed with Dave Filoni, the executive director for The Mandalorian, saying of him and Favreau: "We're in really good hands."
Weathers agreed to accept the part if he could have the opportunity to direct future episodes of The Mandalorian if it was renewed for a second season, to which Favreau agreed.
Although Weathers originally signed on for only a few episodes, the character was later expanded and the role grew larger than what he initially accepted.
Favreau said: "We really did rope him in.
"Upon first reading the part, Weathers said Greef Karga reminded him of film director, screenwriter, and actor John Huston, particularly his performance in the film Chinatown (1974).
He felt there was a theatricality and "larger than life" quality to the character, and he deliberately performed some of his lines in a showy and melodramatic way as a result.
Weathers' casting was first announced on December 12, 2018, though rumors had been had been discussed on the Making Star Wars podcast and other Internet sites two months prior to the formal announcement.
Weathers called The Mandalorian one of the "most exciting projects" of his career, saying: "Being a part of this is one of the greatest things that's happened in all of the years that I've been in entertainment."
He said he was very impressed by the quality of writing in the scripts, and that he particularly enjoyed his character's shifting allegiances and unpredictable about-faces: "It's much more interesting to play someone who is not all of one thing, not one-dimensional. ...
Certainly with Greef, you have to really keep your eye on him.
"Weathers said he knew little about Greef Karga's backstory before playing the character, and that he did not want to know it because he felt the mystery helped him convey a sense of ambiguity.
Regarding Greef's past history, Weathers said, "I didn't ask it.
I didn't care.
I didn't want to know."
However, he also added: "If I had to guess, he was going through some dark times.
He was doing maybe some pretty dark stuff.
"
Weathers is slated to direct an episode of The Mandalorian in the second season.
He will be the second cast member of The Mandalorian to also direct an episode, after IG-11 actor Taika Waititi.

===
Filming ===
There was a great deal of secrecy surrounding the filming of The Mandalorian, and Weathers was not allowed to divulge any details about the series.
In the early months, he was not even allowed reveal that he was appearing in the show.
He joked: "I had to cut my finger and sign in blood that I would say nothing about it."
The actor said his time filming The Mandalorian has been a positive experience, describing it as: "a liberating experience when you have so many smart, talented, collaborative, good-hearted, caring people around you on a daily basis".
Weathers performed his own stunts for The Mandalorian.
He said he has pushed for diversity in the casting of The Mandalorian, not only based upon race but also such factors as height, age, and physical appearance
: "I want to see anything that we have experienced in the world to be in that universe, because they're disparate creatures coming from every part of the universe.
So why wouldn't they be there?"
After filming each episode, Weathers liked to watch footage and study what the director and actors brought to each individual scene.
Weathers said he particularly enjoyed working with director Deborah Chow during filming of "Chapter 3: The Sin", because she had planned what she wanted to do for the episode very precisely and meticulously in advance.
He said this took a lot of pressure off of him and the rest of the cast, giving them more freedom and helping ensure their own choices were in sync with hers.
Weathers' action sequences in "Chapter 3:
The Sin" took a particularly long time to film due of the many elements involved in the shootout scene.
In Greef Karga's scenes with the Client, played by German film director Werner Herzog, Weathers deliberately made Greef less confident and commanding than normal in order to convey that the Client was a dangerous character.
He was a great admirer of Herzog, referring to him as "maestro" on the set of The Mandalorian, and the two had extensive conversations with each other about Herzog's past films and his relationship with actor Klaus Kinski.

==
Cultural impact ==


===
Critical reception ===
Greef Karga has received generally positive feedback from fans and reviewers.
Screen Rant ranked him sixth on a list of the best characters from the first season of The Mandalorian, as well as on a separate list of the most interesting characters from the season.
Vulture writer Keith Phipps praised the character, writing "Just the way he says 'Mando!'
is a delight", a reference to the Mandalorian's nickname.
Kevin Pantoja of Screen Rant complimented Weathers' performance, who he said is "always awesome".
Fans particularly enjoyed Greef's line
"Do the magic hand thing!",
which he says to Grogu in the season finale while trying to encourage him to use the Force against their enemies.
Nobelle Borines of Epicstream called it his "most iconic line" of the season.
After the first season concluded, Weathers thanked his fans for their support, writing: "Your enjoyment and appreciation for the work done by the creators, directors, cast and crew fills us all with pride.
Until fall of 2020, 'Do the magic hand thing, baby'!"
Greef Karga's costume was ranked tenth on a Screen Rant list of the ten best costumes in the first season of The Mandalorian.

===
Merchandise ===
A Funko Pop figurine of Greef Karga was announced on December 31, 2019.
Lego produced a minfigure of Greef Karga, included in the 2020 set 75292, the Razor Crest.
===
Video games ===
Greef became a playable character in the game
Star Wars: Galaxy of Heroes on April 22, 2020.
==
References ==


===
Citations ===


===
Works cited ===
Weathers, Carl; Breznican, Anthony (November 12, 2019). "
Still Watching: The Mandalorian — "Chapter One" with Jon Favreau and Carl Weathers" (Podcast).
Vanity Fair.
Retrieved January 29, 2020.

==
External links ==
Greef Karga in the StarWars.com Databank
Greef Karga on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Migs Mayfeld is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise who appears in the Disney+ television series The Mandalorian.
He is a former Imperial sharpshooter turned mercenary who leads a crew in an attempt to rescue a prisoner from a New Republic prison transport ship.
His team includes the show's protagonist, "The Mandalorian", with whom he repeatedly clashes and ultimately betrays.
The Mandalorian outsmarts him, resulting in Mayfeld's arrest and imprisonment, though he is later released so that he can aid the Mandalorian's efforts to rescue Grogu.
As a result, the character evolves from a minor antagonist to a viable ally of the Mandalorian, with whom he eventually makes amends during their mission.

Mayfeld is portrayed by actor and comedian Bill Burr, who was not a fan of Star Wars and repeatedly mocked the franchise and its fans before he accepted the role.
The Mandalorian creator Jon Favreau offered the part to Burr, believing his past criticism of the franchise would make his casting that much more amusing.
Several reviewers have noted that Mayfeld's sardonic personality and hard-edged sense of humor is similar to Burr's real-life comedic style.
Burr was extremely impressed with the filming of The Mandalorian, complimenting the technical aspects of filming as well as the writing style of the series.

The character of Mayfeld received a generally positive response from reviewers, with many complimenting Burr's performance and the humor the character brought to the series.
Reviewers critical of Mayfeld felt the character was flat, underdeveloped, or too incompetent as a mercenary.
Mayfeld received a more positive response for his appearance in The Mandalorian's second season, namely "Chapter 15: The Believer", which characterized him more in depth and explored his backstory and motivations, while setting him as an example for ex-Imperial soldiers who became aware of the Empire's evil ways only after its downfall.
Burr received a significant amount of mock outrage from fans for a scene in "Chapter 6: The Prisoner", in which he dropped Grogu, the show's hugely popular breakout character.

==
Appearances ==


===
Backstory ===
Migs Mayfeld is a former sharpshooter from the Galactic Empire, which has fallen out of power by the time that The Mandalorian is set.
He uses two blaster pistols, as well as a third blaster controlled by a droid arm attached to his backpack, which he can extract and retract as necessary for additional firepower.
The character's first name was not revealed until the second season of The Mandalorian.

===
Season 1 ===
Mayfeld appears in the episode "Chapter 6:
The Prisoner", in which he leads a crew of mercenaries in an attempt to rescue a prisoner from a New Republic prison transport ship.
He is appointed by Ranzar "Ran" Malk, the leader of the mercenaries, as the point man for the mission, Ran asserts that Mayfeld has the same level of authority on the mission as Ran himself would.
with a crew that includes the show's protagonist, a bounty hunter known as "The Mandalorian", as well as fellow mercenaries Burg, Q9-0, and Xi'an.
Unbeknownst to the Mandalorian, however, the rescue target is a Twi'lek alien named Qin, with whom the Mandalorian previously had a falling out, and the mercenaries intend to betray the Mandalorian once Qin is rescued.
When the Mandalorian mockingly questions Mayfeld's abilities, alluding to the fact that former Imperial stormtroopers were notoriously bad shots, Mayfeld defensively responds, "I wasn't a stormtrooper, wiseass."
During the trip to the prison transport, Mayfeld repeatedly mocks the Mandalorian as well, questioning whether he is really as good a warrior as his reputation suggests, urging him to remove his helmet, and suggesting he may be hiding his face because he is secretly a Gungan.
At one point, the mercenary crew discovered Grogu, a young alien also known as "The Child", whom the Mandalorian was hiding within his ship, the Razor Crest.
Mayfeld questions whether Grogu is a pet, and further mocks the Mandalorian by pretending he is going to drop Grogu.
When Q9-0 suddenly takes the ship out of hyperspace without warning the crew, Mayfeld falls and does drop Grogu, but he is unharmed.
Upon arrival at the prison transport, Mayfeld, Xi'an, Burg, and the Mandalorian enter the ship while Q9-0 disables onboard surveillance and transmits directions to them from the Razor Crest cockpit.
After gunfights with several security droids, Mayfeld's party reached the transport's control room where they encounter a New Republican guard named Davan.
Mayfeld wants to kill Davan, but the Mandalorian disagrees, and the two draw guns on each other as a result, leading to Xi'an killing Davan with a knife.
The mercenaries reach a prison cell and releases Qin, after which Mayfeld and the others trap the Mandalorian in the cell and try to abandon him there.
After the Mandalorian escapes, he jams communication between Mayfeld's crew and Q9-0.
Mayfeld and Qin become separated from Xi'an and Burg.
While the latter duo attempt to find and kill the Mandalorian, Mayfeld and Qin decide to try to escape on their own; Qin promises he will triple Mayfeld's compensation if he gets Qin off the ship.
After Mayfeld and Qin split up, the Mandalorian stalks Mayfeld, sneaking up on him in a hallway as the lights flicker on and off, and Mayfeld screams as the Mandalorian comes upon him.
The Mandalorian did not kill Mayfeld, but instead locked him in a cell in the prison transport with Xi'an and Burg.
===
Season 2 ===
Mayfeld is mentioned and pictured at the end of the episode "Chapter 14:
The Tragedy".
After Grogu's capture by Moff Gideon's Imperial remnant, the Mandalorian decides to break Mayfeld, who was arrested by the New Republic and sentenced to 50 years of service at the Karthon Chop Fields.
To learn where he is being held, the Mandalorian visits his ally Cara Dune, who has become a marshal for the New Republic and has access to files on Mayfeld.

In "Chapter 15:
The Believer",
Mayfeld (also called inmate 34667) is temporarily released from prison by Cara to assist the Mandalorian and his group by accessing the Empire's network in Morak, a secret Imperial mining hub, to learn the location of Gideon's ship.
After successfully infiltrating the hub with the Mandalorian, he suffers a panic attack when seeing his old commander Valin Hess, forcing the Mandalorian to retrieve the data by removing his helmet.
However, when Hess questions him, Mayfeld intercedes, and when they reminiscence about their participation in Operation Cinder which thousands were killed, Mayfeld shoots Hess, initiating a violent escape which the entire facility is destroyed.

After helping obtain the data, Mayfeld is allowed to leave by Cara, who assures that he will be declared dead.

== Characterization ==
As a former Imperial sharpshooter, Mayfeld is good in a fight and is an excellent marksman; the character Ran Malk refers to him "one of the best triggermen I've ever seen".
He has a hard-edged sense of humor, which several reviewers compared to the real-life comedic style of Bill Burr, the actor and comedian who portrays the character.
Mayfeld enjoys mocking others, and has a bullying personality; a Polygon article by Charlie Hill described him as "the epitome of a schoolyard bully but with a murderous streak".
He also speaks with Burr's same real-life Boston accent.
Mayfeld is arrogant, hot-headed, ruthless, unpredictable, and has a sardonic attitude.
Space.com writer Scott Snowden described him as a cowboy-like character.
Mayfeld is also duplicitous and untrustworthy, as he shows by his willingness to betray the Mandalorian at the conclusion of their mission together.
Comic Book Resources writer Sam Stone theorized that Mayfeld's cynicism and mean-spirited personality may be rooted in bitterness toward the Galactic Empire having lost its war with the Rebel Alliance, thus reducing Mayfeld's role to that of an outlaw.
Stone wrote that Mayfeld appears "visibly frustrated by his time fighting for the losing side of the Galactic Civil War before taking his talents to less-than-legal clients".

==
Concept and creation ==


===
Portrayal ===
Mayfeld is portrayed by actor and comedian Bill Burr.
Burr was not a fan of the Star Wars franchise, which he had repeatedly and publicly mocked it in the past, as well as Game of Thrones and several other popular science fiction and fantasy franchises.
In a 2015 interview with Conan O'Brien, Burr described the original Star Wars film as a "cheesy self-help book put in outer space with, like, Muppets".
Burr also regularly mocked Star Wars fans, particularly during the release of new films, saying things like: "How old are you?
Why are you still dressing like Boba Fett?"

Burr met Jon Favreau, the creator and showrunner of The Mandalorian, through their mutual friend Mike Binder, who had directed Burr's stand-up comedy film Paper Tiger (2019).
Burr was also acquainted with Favreau through actor Vince Vaughn, who starred along with Favreau in the film Swingers (1996) and was an executive producer of Burr's animated sitcom F Is for Family.
Additionally, Favreau was a listener of Burr's comedy podcast, Monday Morning Podcast, and Burr appeared on The Chef Show, a cooking show Favreau created.
Favreau approached Burr at a birthday party to discuss a role on The Mandalorian he felt would be a good fit for Burr.
Burr pointed out his previous mockery of Star Wars and suggested he give the role to someone more appropriate, but Favreau felt it would be funny if Burr played the role given his lack of enthusiasm for the franchise, and he believed Burr's fans would find it amusing.
Burr's wife, Nia Hill, urged him to accept the part, which he ultimately did, although Burr said he would have accepted any offer by Favreau based on his respect for the director.
Burr's casting on The Mandalorian was first revealed at the Star Wars Celebration fan convention in Chicago on April 14, 2019, when he was briefly seen in a teaser trailer during a panel discussion about the series.
The footage was only intended to be viewed by Celebration attendants, but photos and videos of Burr's footage taken by fans later leaked to the Internet.
Jake Kleinman of Inverse wrote: "Early footage from The Mandalorian didn't reveal much except that he sounds like a total badass."
Burr himself first confirmed his appearance on the series via the social media network Twitter on August 24, 2019.
According to Metro Boston writer Matt Juul, "fans of the franchise were both excited and a bit skeptical" when the casting was announced, due to Burr's past criticism of the Star Wars franchise.
Mayfeld was featured briefly on the first official trailer for The Mandalorian, released on August 23, 2019; Burr said "you see the back of my bald head for half a second".
Mayfeld's face became visible in his brief appearance in the second Mandalorian trailer, released on October 28, 2019, with the character firing his weapons at an off-screen enemy.
Several fans expressed excitement about Burr's character on social media after the trailer's release, with some saying he was the primary reason they would be watching the show.
Burr is one of two stars of the television series Breaking Bad to have appeared in The Mandalorian, along with Giancarlo Esposito.
Burr portrayed henchman Patrick Kuby on Breaking Bad, while Giancarlo Esposito played antagonist Gus Fring on that series, and antagonist Moff Gideon on The Mandalorian.
Burr is also one of several comedians with brief acting roles in the first season of The Mandalorian, including Brian Posehn, Horatio Sanz, Amy Sedaris, Richard Ayoade, Adam Pally, and Jason Sudeikis.
Nick Mangione of Geek.com jokingly wrote: "
Is this series just an excuse for Jon Favreau to get all his favorite comedians into the Star Wars universe?"
===
Filming ===
Several of Burr's scenes for The Mandalorian were filmed on a sound stage in Southern California on a "Volume", a large warehouse-like motion-capture stage with LED video screens and tracking cameras spread throughout the space.
Using a combination of physical set pieces and images projected onto the screens, the Volume allows the actors to be filmed and placed into a digital environment.
Burr's scenes on Ran Malk's space station were among the scenes filmed on the Volume.
Burr described the filming technology as "next-level", and said the moving background imagery occasionally made him feel dizzy, or as if he was experiencing vertigo.
During filming, Burr was only provided the scripts for the portions of the episode in which he was specifically featured.
Burr called filming The Mandalorian an "amazing experience" and said the way it was shot was "really, really fun".
He was also particularly impressed by the director of the episode, Rick Famuyiwa, who he said "crushed it".
Burr believed The Mandalorian more closely resembled a Spaghetti Western than a traditional work of science fiction, saying: "This isn't your dad's Star Wars".
On Burr's last filming day, Jon Favreau invited him to see the newly-complete trailer for The Mandalorian, which very much impressed Burr.
==
Reception ==
Immediately after "Chapter 6:
The Prisoner" was made available on Disney+, multiple fans were discussing and praising Mayfeld and Burr's performance on social media outlets, particularly on Twitter.
Armaan Babu of MEA WorldWide wrote: "Twitter was all abuzz with Bill Burr's performance as the fast-talking mercenary".
The character of Mayfeld received a generally positive response from reviewers, with many complimenting Burr's performance.
Sam Stone of Comic Book Resources called Mayfeld a "fan-favorite" and a "memorable character", praising Burr's "irascible performance".
Screen Rant writer Kevin Pantoja called Mayfeld "arguably the highlight" of his episode, a fun character who infused some comedy into the series.
He also praised the performance of Burr, who he described as "always entertaining", and said he would like to see more of Mayfeld on The Mandalorian in the future.
Dan Brooks, a writer with The Mandalorian production company Lucasfilm, felt Burr delivered a "great performance" as Mayfeld, saying he infused the character with a "unpredictable schoolyard-bully air".
Screen Rant writer Ben Sherlock called Mayfeld an interesting antihero and a "character to remember", saying he was portrayed "brilliantly" by Burr.
Looper writer Brian Boone said Burr and his "acerbic, motor-mouthed stand-up" was a perfect fit for Mayfeld.
Brad Jackson of The Federalist praised the character, saying he was "expertly played" by Burr, and said Mayfeld questioning whether the Mandalorian was a Gungan was "one of the best lines of the series".
Variety writer Will Thorne wrote that Burr "brought a much-needed injection of spunk and peril to the series".
Armaan Babu said Mayfeld maintained Burr's comedic stylings, and wrote: "However brief, Bill Burr's appearance left everyone smiling."

Sarah Moran of Screen Rant said the fact that Burr is not a Star Wars fan in real-life "only makes his role on The Mandalorian all the funnier".
Fatherly writer Ryan Britt said Mayfeld had the best jokes of the episode, made all the more amusing because, as a non-Star Wars fan, Britt said that Burr probably did not even understand the jokes himself.
Entertainment Weekly writer Anthony Breznican, referring to Burr's roots in the Boston area, said the actor brought "not just the distinctive voice of his hometown to the screen, but also the general Masshole attitude" to the part of Mayfeld.
Comicbook.com writer Charlie Ridgely said Mayfeld had several great jokes throughout his episode.
Forbes writer Dani Di Placido described Mayfeld as Burr essentially "playing a Star Wars version of himself".
Not all reviews were positive.
IGN writer Joe Skrebels called Mayfeld a "pretty flat villainous leader".
Tom Foster of TV Overmind called Burr a "skilled actor", but felt Mayfeld was an underdeveloped character and that the dialogue in the screenplay was too quick and vague.
IndieWire writer Tyler Hersko said Burr is funny and talented, but that "the episode’s writing unfortunately gives him little to work with, and that Mayfeld does little more than insult the Mandalorian for his entire running time.
Megan Crouse Den of Geek wrote that Mayfeld and the other characters in his crew "didn't work for me because I didn't believe in them as mercenaries.
They're so hapless."
Several reviewers wrote that the entire mercenary crew, including Mayfeld, was generally incompetent and unintelligent throughout the episode.
Comic Book Resources writer Renaldo Matadeen called them the "dumbest" criminals in the Star Wars universe, with "a low IQ and no sense of tactics or strategy, leaving us wondering how they got this far in the first place".
Nick Mangione of Geek.com wrote "The first hint that this won’t be just a standard heist storyline is that all these people suck.
They are all the worst.
As soon as the crew is introduced you never want to see any of them again.
"Mayfeld was ranked eighth on a Screen Rant list of the 10 most interesting characters from the first season of The Mandalorian.
He also ranked ninth on a separate Screen Rant list of the 10 best characters introduced on the show, and fourth on a list of "10 Characters We Hope To See Return In Season 2".
Additionally, his costume and backpack with the retractable blaster arm ranked ninth on Screen Rant's list of the ten best costumes in the show's first season.
Mayfeld was also included on a list by Vulture of the 15 best cameo appearances on The Mandalorian, and ranked tenth on a list by the Los Angeles Times of the best "scene partners" for the Child.
Burr said he got a "great response" from his fans in response to his portrayal of Mayfeld.
Despite his past mockery of Star Wars, Burr said he is a fan of The Mandalorian and has watched the episodes even without his character featured, saying: "The way they’re doing this one, it's awesome".
Burr received a significant amount of mock outrage from fans of The Mandalorian for a scene in which Mayfeld dropped the Child, the show's hugely popular breakout character colloquially known as "Baby Yoda".
Jackson McHenry of Vulture wrote: "My man dropped Baby Yoda, and we cannot stand for that."
Burr said fans were "breaking my balls" about the scene on Twitter, and he jokingly responded to the issue on his podcast, Monday Morning Podcast:
I didn't drop the Baby Yoda.
The fucking robot dude came out of hyperspace and he didn't tell anybody.
Alright?
Until you're in hyperspace holding a fucking baby and some robot – like that's not unsettling enough — is driving the fucking thing and slams on the brakes, let's see how you do.
Walk a mile in my fucking space slippers before you fucking come at me.

==
References ==


===
Citations ===


===
Works cited ===


==
External links ==
Mayfeld on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Qi'ra is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise, first appearing in the 2018 film Solo:
A Star Wars Story and portrayed by English actress Emilia Clarke.
The character was introduced in the 2018 prequel novel
Most Wanted by Rae Carson.
A practitioner of Teräs Käsi, she is Han Solo's childhood best friend and first love from the planet Corellia.
The pair live on the streets before she is captured and he flees the planet.
Qi'ra subsequently becomes a lieutenant in the Crimson Dawn crime syndicate.

==
Appearances ==


===
Film ===


====
Solo:
A Star Wars Story ====
In the 2018 Star Wars Anthology film Solo:
A Star Wars Story, Qi'ra is introduced as an orphaned street thief living on the shipbuilding world of Corellia.
She and her lover, Han, attempt to use the valuable fuel source coaxium to bribe their way through a checkpoint to escape the planet and the criminal gang pursuing them.
Qi'ra is apprehended, but urges Han to go on without her.
He does, and vows to return for her.

Three years later, seeking funding to buy a ship to return to Corellia, Han participates in a coaxium heist that goes awry.
He accompanies his new associate Tobias Beckett to explain their failure to Dryden Vos, a high-ranking crime boss in the Crimson Dawn syndicate.
Han and Qi'ra are reunited, as she is now Vos's top lieutenant.
Han suggests a risky plan to steal unrefined coaxium from the mines on the planet Kessel; Vos approves but insists that Qi'ra accompany the team.
She leads them to Lando Calrissian, an accomplished smuggler and pilot who agrees to join the mission with his ship, the Millennium Falcon, in exchange for a share of the profits.
The theft is a success, but Han and Qi'ra become sympathetic to the cause of the rebels who are trying to prevent the syndicates and the Galactic Empire from gaining greater domination over the galaxy.
They attempt to trick Vos, but the double-crossing Beckett has already alerted the crime lord to their plan.
Caught aiding Han, Qi'ra tells Dryden she will prove her loyalty to him by sacrificing something she loves, and advances on Han.
She betrays and kills Vos instead, and sends Han after Beckett.
Once alone, Qi'ra contacts Vos's superior, Maul, to inform him of the mission's failure and claim Vos's position within the syndicate; she blames the death of Vos on Beckett.
Qi'ra then abandons Han and leaves for Dathomir to meet with Maul as he commands her.

===
Animated series ===


====
Star Wars Forces of Destiny ====
In the 2018 episode "Triplecross" of Star Wars Forces of Destiny, pirate Hondo Ohnaka and bounty hunter droid IG-88 pursue Qi'ra, who pits them against each other to collect the bounty on them.

===
Literature ===
Qi'ra is introduced in the novel Most Wanted by Rae Carson.
The novel focuses on Han and Qi'ra shortly before the events of Solo:
A Star Wars Story.
It was published by Disney-Lucasfilm Press on May 25, 2018, in concert with the film.

===
Games ===
Qi'ra appears as a playable character in Star Wars:
Galaxy of Heroes, the mobile RPG game developed by Capital Games and Published by Electronic Arts.
===
Merchandise ===
Several toys of Qi'ra have been made available.
Among them, a 12-inch Qi'ra (Corellia) figure which features a movie-inspired design, a six-inch action figure by Hasbro as part of the company's Star Wars: The Black Series toy line, a Funko Pop figurine, Lego Star Wars figurines, the Star Wars Nerf Qi'Ra blaster by Hasbro, a star wars Mighty Muggs figure, as well as T-shirts featuring the character.

==
Character ==


===
Description ===
Qi'ra is introduced as an earnest thief in love with Han and dreaming of escape from the slums of the planet Corellia.
They are separated by circumstance, and when they reunite years later, they have both been through life-changing experiences.
Clarke called Qi'ra a "badass" who "kind of follows a femme fatale arc", and said, "She has a couple of guises, but essentially she is just fighting to stay alive.
If you've got a really glamorous lady in a really sordid environment, you kind of know the glamour is hiding a few rough roads.
"
Solo director Ron Howard described Qi'ra as secretive, slippery, and morally questionable—"a much different sort of a character" from Daenerys Targaryen, Clarke's character from the HBO series Game of Thrones.
Clarke noted that her Solo character "isn't like the women that you've seen in Star Wars yet", and said that "Qi'ra is different from the other women I've played, but the similarity is her strength, and her survival instincts.
She just has a bit more grit."
She said, "We're going to hit you with a character that could very easily well be a dude, because you question her motives.
That's really ...
exciting in the Star Wars universe, because that has never happened."
Clarke said, "Qi'ra's journey is definitely one of survival and strength.
The way that I felt about her was
yeah
this girl has got a core of steel."
Calling Qi'ra a "galactic femme fatale", Entertainment Weekly's Anthony Breznican wrote:

This is a character who doesn't want her full resume out there.
She's a woman of shadows, of secrecy.
She's a woman of many identities, the truest ones hidden away and only visible to those she trusts, which may be no one ...
She's also one of the primary forces that shape
[Han] the young smuggler.

Clarke said, "Every single part of her as a character reflects on the Han Solo that we know and love."
She explained:

The beautiful thing about this Han Solo story is it's highlighting all of the most brilliant aspects of Han Solo the character and characterizing those aspects in characters that he meets on his journey to becoming who he is...
You are seeing all of these different elements that make up who he is through the people and the interactions and the relationships just as we all do as human beings.
We are simply the embodiment of our experiences...
You see the beginnings of him, this loveable rogue.
You get it fine-tuned throughout these relationships, and Qi'ra is one of those relationships that has an impact on him as a character...
The goal is that the shadow of Qi'ra is there in Han as a character that we know.
This girl is another texture that makes up who he is when we first meet him.

According to Solo co-writer Jonathan Kasdan, Qi'ra is Han's "formative experience with romance, and that experience very directly influences the relationships he has later on with people like Leia."
Describing Qi'ra's relationship with Han, Clarke explained that "They grew up as comrades, essentially.
They grew up as pals, as partners in crime.
There is obviously the romantic side of things.
But they grew up together.
So they were kids together."
She said that later, "within that relationship, the thing that you see with Qi'ra is that she is an enigma."
Clarke also noted, "There is this underlying joy in an origin story because you know where they end up.
And Qi'ra is nowhere to be seen, so...
something has happened!...
Something must have happened to affect him as a person, but for us fans not to know about her."
===
Portrayal ===
In October 2016, Tessa Thompson, Naomi Scott, Zoë Kravitz, Emilia Clarke, Kiersey Clemons, Jessica Henwick, and Adria Arjona were being considered for the female lead in Solo: A Star Wars Story.
Clarke, known for her role as Daenerys Targaryen in the HBO fantasy television series Game of Thrones, was cast the following month.
Clarke told Vanity Fair that she struggled with the character under Solo's original co-directors, Phil Lord and Chris Miller, and sought advice from the film's father-and-son screenwriters, Lawrence and Jonathan Kasdan.
She said of the role, "She'll be the sort of character that will keep you on your toes, and I think that was one of the biggest things that drew me to her as a character, and got me really excited.
"Qi'ra was featured in the May 25, 2018 episode "Triplecross" of the 2D animated web series Star Wars Forces of Destiny, voiced by Olivia Hack.

== Reception ==


===
General ===
Qi'ra has been positively received by both critics and fans, with many referring to her as a standout, and the most fascinating aspect of Solo: A Star Wars Story.
Pete Morrison of the Rebels Report called her the best character in the film.
Stating that Emilia Clarke jumps from genre franchise in Game of Thrones to another in a galaxy far, far away and manages to have the most complex and interesting story arc of any character in the film.
Futurism's Marguerita Tan wrote that "Qi'ra is a complex character who is not only intelligent and resourceful, but also someone who can look after herself".
Tan concluded that it wasn't hard to understand why many fans were so keen to see the character in more on-screen adventures.
Dana Brandt of The Daily Cardinal was critical of the character's arc stating that Qi'ra, and by extension her relationship with Han was underdeveloped.
Bustle's Casey Cipriani suggests that Qi'ra may or may not have been a Sith and states that a female villain who can use the Force has never been portrayed in a Star Wars film.

===
Future ===
Many have expressed interest in a follow-up to Qi'ra's story.
Derrick Clements of the Daily Harold wrote, "she is introduced as a character with depth and mystery to spare.
Most of all, where the film leaves her is tremendously full of possibility".
Writing for Comic Book Resources, Rita Dorsch proclaimed Qi'ra's turn in Solo to be the most interesting part of the film and went on to state that any follow-up needs to focus on her.
Bustle's Angelica Floria stated, "the headstrong combatant played by Clarke seems to only have just begun her role in the Star Wars universe".
She notes that Clarke signed on for multiple films and adds that the ending of Solo makes it clear that future Star Wars projects could continue the story of Qi'ra and Darth Maul's future with the Crimson Dawn.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Qi'ra in the StarWars.com Databank
Qi'ra on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Cobb Vanth (also known as The Marshal), is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise.
Introduced in the 2015–2017 Chuck Wendig novel trilogy Aftermath, he is a former slave who has used the armor of Boba Fett to bring order to Tatooine from immediately following to five years after the events of the 1983 film Return of the Jedi.
Throughout the trilogy, Cobb faces off against the mining collective known as the Red Key Raiders and classic Star Wars species such as the Tusken Raiders and a krayt dragon, and while successful in defeating the former is unable to find the latter.
He reappears in the Disney+ television series The Mandalorian, portrayed by Timothy Olyphant, set years after the events of the trilogy and depicting the character joining forces with the Tusken Raiders and "The Mandalorian" to finally defeat the krayt dragon.

==
Character ==
Cobb first appeared in the 2015 Chuck Wendig novel Aftermath, the first installment of what became known as the Aftermath trilogy, via an interlude chapter in each of the three novels.
He is a former Imperial slave and member of the Crimson Dawn syndicate under Maul, turned marshal after its fall.
===
Portrayal ===
Cobb is voiced by Marc Thompson in the audiobook for the Aftermath trilogy, and played by Timothy Olyphant in the second season of The Mandalorian.

==
Appearances ==


===
Aftermath trilogy (2015–2017) ===
The Aftermath trilogy was written by Chuck Wendig between 2015 and 2017.
In addition to Cobb, the trilogy introduced several notable characters, including Norra and Snap Wexley.
Beginning immediately after the events depicted in Return of the Jedi and concluding one year later with the Battle of Jakku, the Rebel Alliance, now known as the New Republic, fights the remnants of the Galactic Empire, as they consolidate behind Gallius Rax and Rae Sloane in two separate factions; Rax seeking to become the new Emperor, and Sloane seeking to form a more peaceful "first order".
On Tatooine, various mining syndicates take advantage of the decreased Imperial presence and vacuum left by the death of Jabba the Hutt to take control over several settlements from which they demand tribute; Cobb Vanth, a former slave-turned-lawman, decides to take a stand against them.

In Aftermath (2015), Adwin Charu, a representative for the Red Key Raiders crime syndicate that sprouts up on Tatooine after the death of Jabba the Hutt, meets with a group of Jawas for some mining equipment, as the syndicate wants to work under the guise of being a mining company, yet cannot come to any agreement with the Jawas.
Cobb Vanth, present on the Jawas' vehicle, presents himself as someone willing to help Adwin find purchases for the collective, as Cobb has a rapport with the creatures.
After examining the wreckage of Jabba's barge, recovered from a Sarlacc recently eaten by a krayt dragon, the pair come across some Mandalorian armor, both pulling blasters upon the other in seeking to acquire it, with Cobb shooting Adwin.
Cobb orders the injured Adwin to tell the rest of the Red Key Raiders to cease their operations or he will come for them, then leaves with the armor.

Life Debt (2016) reveals that Cobb has since become the sheriff of the town Mos Pelgo after liberating it from the Red Key Raiders' mining collective, continuing to wear the Mandalorian armor and take a stand against the Red Key Raiders' forces.
Meeting Malakili, the former beastmaster for Jabba, framed for killing a group of Red Key Raiders, Cobb agrees to accompany Malakili – and the infant heir of Jabba he is protecting – back to Mos Pelgo (also known as Freetown) to start a different life.

In Empire's End (2017), set about a month before the events of The Mandalorian episode "Chapter 9
: The Marshal", Cobb and Malakili, continue to work together to create a deal with the Tusken Raiders to keep the town protected.
The Tusken Raiders agree, due to the town being in a sacred location and having a Hutt, and being promised the pearl from inside a krayt dragon.
However, Red Key members come and capture the town before the krayt dragon can be killed, reducing Cobb's arsenal to such an extent he is no longer able to try to do so.
While held captive, Cobb is revealed to have once been a slave and former operative of Crimson Dawn, having slave markings on his back.
Soon enough, Tusken Raiders come and free Cobb from the Red Key members.
They then drive out the crime syndicate, and Cobb vows to continue protecting the town.
However, in the aftermath, the town is turned against the Tusken Raiders, and Malakili leaves with the Hutt.

===
The Mandalorian (2020) ===
In May 2020, it was reported that Timothy Olyphant would appear as Cobb Vanth in the second season of The Mandalorian web television series, potentially confirming the character's Mandalorian armour from the Aftermath trilogy to have been that of Boba Fett.
In the second season's premiere, "Chapter 9:
The Marshal", the show's title character arrives in Mos Pelgo looking for a Mandalorian and is surprised to find Cobb instead, who is wearing Fett's Mandalorian armor.
Following a brief standoff, after which Cobb summarises how he acquired the armour, he offers to give his armor to the Mandalorian in exchange for his assistance in killing the krayt dragon he failed to kill in the Aftermath trilogy, allying with the Tusken Raiders once again to do so.
Thanks to an ingenious idea by the Mandalorian to use a bantha as a suicide bomber and have it detonate once the dragon eats it, which nearly results in failure and the Mandalorian's death, they manage to kill the dragon, obtaining a pearl in the process.
Following this, Cobb honors their agreement by giving up the armor to the Mandalorian, and the two part on good terms.

== Reception ==
Upon the character's initial appearance in the Aftermath trilogy, speculation was common as to the character's Mandalorian armour belonging to Boba Fett, or the character themselves being a disguised Fett; the former theory was proven true in the second season of The Mandalorian.
Olyphant's portrayal of Cobb in The Mandalorian was generally praised, with Rachel Leishman of The Mary Sue describing the character's backstory of acquiring the armour of Fett as "[h]onestly, iconic", and Comic Book Resources drawing comparisons of Olyphant's portrayal to "basically [his Justified character]
Raylan Givens...
in Space".
TechRadar additionally expressed interest in seeing a spin-off developed around the character.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Cobb Vanth in the StarWars.com Databank
Cobb Vanth on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Iden Versio is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise.
She is the commander of Inferno Squad, a group of elite Imperial soldiers, but near the end of the Galactic Civil War becomes disillusioned with the Galactic Empire's actions and defects to the Rebel Alliance.
Iden is the player character of the 2017 video game Star Wars Battlefront II, an action shooter developed by  EA DICE, in collaboration with Criterion Games and Motive Studios.
She serves as the protagonist of the game's campaign and is voiced and portrayed via motion capture by Janina Gavankar.

==
Development and design ==

Battlefront II's campaign narrative and characters, including Iden, were developed by Electronic Arts's Motive Studios branch.
Iden Versio is voiced and portrayed through motion capture by actress and musician Janina Gavankar.
On the motion capture aspect of her performance, Gavankar commented "The technology has caught up so much that you can deliver a subtle performance and
it will catch your micro-expressions [...]
I decided to deliver as subtle of a performance as I would on camera.
During her audition process for the game, Gavanakar was not told that the project she was auditioning for was Battlefront II nor that she was auditioning for the lead role, but noted that her knowledge of the gaming industry assisted her in "[putting] two and two together."
She commented that "I just got an audition and it said [...]
EA Motive.
When you send someone like me, who is a hardcore gamer, an audition like this, I knew exactly what it was.
I knew that if it was Motive that it was Battlefront."
Gavankar commented that the development process for Iden was highly collaborative.
She detailed that she "worked with the writers of the game and the writer of the book
and we had access to a LucasFilm story group member every day on set.
We really found out who [Iden] was together.
We worked with military consultants to figure out how we moved together as a squad; all of these things took a lot of care and conversation."

Steve Blank, a creative executive for Lucasfilm described Iden as a "tried and true and through and through Imperial."
Gavankar detailed Iden as having an "unshaking loyalty to the Empire" as a result of her early life upbringing to be "the perfect soldier, the perfect officer."
She commented that Iden "is a literal poster child for the Empire.
Her father is an Admiral and her mother is a propaganda artist.
She actually put Iden in posters."
Gavankar added that "all the way up until the moment [the player begins Battlefront II], [Iden's] story has been dark, dark, dark side."
Despite this, Iden's characterization has been described as "grey" and "complex", due to events that unfold in Battlefront II.
VentureBeat details that that complexity drew Gavankar to the role.
Gavanakar also detailed that even though Iden defects to the Rebellion, she still misses the order, cleanliness, and respect that the Empire carried itself with.
==
Appearances ==


===
Novels ===
Iden Versio debuted in Star Wars Battlefront II: Inferno Squad, a tie-in novel for the 2017 Battlefront II video game.
The Inferno Squad novel was written by Christie Golden and released on July 25, 2017.
Gavankar provided the voice for the novel's audiobook version.
The novel's events directly precede those of the video game.
In the novel, the "Inferno Squad" is an elite team of soldiers led by Commander Iden Versio.
In-universe, the group's formation is authorized by the Empire after the Rebellion steals the plans to the Death Star and destroys the battle station.
The Inferno Squad is tasked with infiltrating and eliminating "the Dreamers", who were the remainder of Saw Gerrera's extremist rebel group, the Partisans.
In Inferno Squad, the unit is established with Iden commanding Gideon Hask, a fellow pilot who graduated top of his class at Coruscant Imperial University, Del Meeko, a TIE fighter pilot and an engineering expert, and Seyn Marana, an intelligence prodigy and master cryptologist.
Iden is also noted for holding the record for most verified kills in battle.
In the novel, Admiral Garrick Versio serves as the squad's supervisor.

===
Video games ===


====
Battlefront II ====
Iden Versio's first video game appearance was in Star Wars Battlefront II (2017), where she is portrayed by Janina Gavankar.
She is the protagonist of the game's single-player campaign, and she is also a playable character in game's multiplayer mode.
In the video game's campaign, she is established as the Commander of Inferno Squad, an Imperial Special Forces unit.
Gavankar also described Inferno Squad as a black ops unit.
Her Inferno Squad mates in the game are Gideon Hask and Del Meeko.
Throughout the game, Iden Versio is accompanied by ID10, a seeker droid which she nicknames Dio.
TJ Ramini, Del Meeko's voice actor, notes that Iden and Del "have a bit of a banter, a bit of a laugh," throughout the game.
After being freed from Rebel captivity by ID10, the player first controls Iden on Endor during the events of Return of the Jedi.
Iden leads Inferno Squad against the Rebellion in the Battle of Endor, during which they witness the destruction of the second Death Star.
Iden then meets with her father, Admiral Garrick Versio and the two receive orders from a now deceased Emperor Palpatine in the form of a hologram recording.
One of Palpatine's posthumous orders is for the Empire to perform Operation:
Cinder, which involved devastating many Imperial planets in order to instill fear in the galaxy and emphasize the Empire's authority.
One of the planets targeted by Operation:
Cinder is Iden's homeworld of Vardos.
Inferno Squad is sent to Vardos to retrieve Gleb, an Imperial ally, so that she is not caught in the destruction of Vardos.
Iden ideologically disagrees with Operation:
Cinder, as it conflicts with Iden's belief that the Empire stands for peace and order.
As a result of her internal conflict with Operation: Cinder, Iden disobeys Imperial commands to not rescue civilians, and she defects from the Empire.
Del Meeko joins Iden, while Hask remains loyal to the Empire.
Following her defection from the Empire, the player continues to control Iden, who briefly was unaligned, but soon joins the in-universe Rebellion movement.
Toward the end of the game's campaign, Iden participates in the Battle of Jakku, the final large-scale military battle of the in-universe Galactic Civil War.
The player controls Iden as she assists the Rebellion in defeating the Empire.
During the battle, Iden engages - and bests - Hask in a dogfight and confronts her father on his ship as it is being destroyed by Rebel fire.
She pleads with him to follow her to safety, but he refuses and urges her to survive.
Following the Rebellion's victory, she begins a romantic relationship with her Inferno Squad partner, Del Meeko.
Nearly 30 years pass, and in the campaign's epilogue, it is revealed that Iden and Del have married and had a daughter.
The campaign ends with a cliffhanger after Hask, now aligned with the First Order kills
Del.


=====
Battlefront II:
Resurrection =====
Iden returns in the Star Wars Battlefront II:
Resurrection downloadable content (DLC).
Mitch Dyer, the co-writer of Battlefront II details that "when the Resurrection DLC begins, [...]
Iden is in a time of peace.
The galaxy is at peace — there is no war."
While the initial Battlefront II campaign features chapters in which the player controls other characters like Luke Skywalker or Lando Calrissian, the Resurrection DLC focuses entirely on Iden.
Dyer commented that this is because "one of the key pieces of feedback [the development team] got was that people really liked playing as Iden.
She's an interesting and compelling new character in the Star Wars universe, so we wanted to really focus the rest of the story on her."
Iden and Del's daughter is revealed to be named Zay in Resurrection.
Toward the end of the Resurrection DLC, while infiltrating Hask's First Order Star Destroyer with her daughter Zay and her partner Shriv, Iden Versio steals the plans for a First Order dreadnought.
Iden confronts and kills Hask but is mortally wounded in the process, and dies before she can escape the Star Destroyer, although Zay, Dio and Shriv manage to get away on a stolen TIE Fighter and send the dreadnought plans to General Leia Organa's Resistance movement.
Leia then sends the trio to gather the Resistance's allies in the Outer Rim.
===
Toys ===
A LEGO minifigure version of Versio is also available in the LEGO Star Wars Inferno Squad Battle Pack, which was released in early 2019.
An expansion to Fantasy Flight's Star Wars Legion, includes and
Iden Versio miniature and cards to include her in standard play.

== Reception ==
The character of Iden Versio received mixed opinions.
In a review of the Inferno Squad novel, Sean Keane of New York Daily News wrote that "We get POV sections from all four members of the squad, but Iden is by far the most developed.
She's a great lead and the novel highlights the strengths and weaknesses of the idealized Imperial upbringing.
She is a talented soldier, but struggles with emotion and attachment.
"In
his review of Star Wars Battlefront II, Bryan Bishop of The Verge praised Janina Gavankar's performance, opining that she "delivers some real pathos with her performance."
Bishop added, "[Iden] may be an Imperial, but she's also a hero in the classic Star Wars tradition: she fights for the ideals that have been instilled in her from birth, and carries with her the kind of devil-may-care swagger that made Han Solo a household name."
Tom Hoggins of The Telepgraph wrote that Gavankar joined an "exclusive club of women leading Star Wars stories, with Iden Versio standing alongside Daisy [Ridley]'s Rey and Felicity Jones' Jyn Erso from Rogue One.
"In
a negative review of Resurrection, Hayden Dingman of PCWorld opines that the setup to the DLC is promising due to the believability of Iden's stakes in comparison with the main campaign and the built-in emotional hook of Del Meeko's death, "compounded by Iden fighting alongside her daughter Zay.
"
Dingman, however, added that "Battlefront II's campaign, proper ending included, is anemic start to finish.
Just so much wasted potential.
I don't know whether blame lies with Disney or with EA and DICE, but the developers had an amazing character in Iden Versio and did nothing with her."
Samuel Roberts of PC Gamer had similar sentiments, commenting that "most of the tension is removed from the story" once "Iden Versio and her comrade, Del, basically join the Rebellion."
Roberts criticized the lack of exploration of Iden's Imperial perspective, commenting that "in the opening, [the player gets] the sense that Iden and company believe in the sense of order that the Empire brings—but their perspective isn't explored with much greater depth than that.
When they turn against the Empire, as the Empire turns on its own people, they make the snap decision to change sides with very little ambiguity."
==
References ==


==
External links ==
Commander Iden Versio in the StarWars.com Databank
Iden Versio on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Doctor Chelli Lona Aphra is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise.
Created by writer Kieron Gillen and artist Salvador Larroca, she first appeared in Marvel Comics' 2015 Star Wars:
Darth Vader comic book series.
Aphra became a breakout character, and began appearing in her own comic series, Star Wars: Doctor Aphra, in December 2016.
She is a morally questionable, criminal archaeologist initially in the employ of Darth Vader, but later in hiding from him.
Aphra is the first original Star Wars character not from the films to lead a Marvel comic series.

==
Character ==
Doctor Aphra is a criminal archaeologist with an expert knowledge of droid and weapons technologies, with a particular interest in ancient weapons and Jedi artifacts.
She travels in a unique starship called the Ark Angel, which features a custom white-and-blue paint job.
StarWars.com described Aphra as "a (mostly) morally bankrupt, in-over-her-head archaeologist", and Slate called her "driven, selfish, decisive, and wildly unpredictable".
SyFy Wire called the character an anti-hero who "shares the snark of Han Solo and sexual charisma of Lando Calrissian, but toes the line between right and wrong far more regularly than these two characters—and more often than not steps over it into the downright naughty."
IGN explained, "Aphra has all of Han's swaggery, scoundrel-y charm, but little of his noble streak."
Creator Kieron Gillen noted that the character's main interest is "this weird obsession she has with uncovering old stuff".
Noting that "Aphra's sarcasm and the careful way she codes her words are a vital part of her character", StarWars.com also explains that though she is somewhat of a genius, Aphra's ability to think on her toes is what has kept her alive in situations where her genius fails her.
Gillen noted that readers can never be sure what the character will or will not do.
Doctor Aphra writer Si Spurrier explained that despite the expectation that Star Wars characters "will always do the right thing", Aphra makes mistakes and sometimes chooses the unexpected.
Sarah Kuhn, the author of Doctor Aphra:
An Audiobook Original, agreed that "[Aphra] is the definition of chaos ...
You never really know exactly what she's going to do, which means that, personally, I think she's having the most fun of anyone in the Star Wars galaxy.
"In
creating the character, Gillen looked to what he called "The Indiana Jones archaeologist archetype", which he believed fit well into Star Wars.
His original concept for Aphra was Indiana Jones and his ramshackle problem solving, but with inverted ethics.
He said that Aphra falls somewhere between a hero and a villain in that "You do see her do good things and bad things."
Gillen added, "She's kind of fun
but at the same time, there's a really dark heart to her."
He explained, "She has this very fun-loving attitude, she's very fun to be around, but she's really bad as a person."
He added:

Aphra ... was designed to be Darth Vader's foil ...
she has to do a lot of the talking when Darth Vader doesn't.
Darth Vader will not make jokes.
To be even a fun book to read, you need her to lighten it.
But when you introduce her as a lead, that kind of changes the dynamic entirely.
A) she becomes slightly more serious, and B)
everyone else around her becomes a lot more deadly.

Spurrier said, "She knows that Vader is probably not a nice person.
She's aware that space fascism is not necessarily a good thing
but it may be the right thing for a chaotic universe".
Gillen compared Aphra to Darth Vader in that fans root for both as anti-heroes, but explained that while Aphra is a "bad person in many ways", Vader is on another level as "one of the greatest villains of all time."
Gillen added, "you can root [for her], because she makes really bad life decisions and sort of rolls with them ...
She doesn't like killing people.
She's not like a random murderer."
He noted that Aphra is complex in that she is "adamantly pro-Empire" but still tends not to obey the Empire's rules.
SyFy Wire described Aphra as a "queer woman of color", noting her affinity for women and slightly Asian appearance.
Slate agreed that the character is "drawn with a suggestion of Asian heritage", and also noted, "She aches for two different women who have claims to her heart—two women whom, inevitably, she must betray to survive."
Gillen confirmed Aphra's sexuality, saying he has written her primarily romantically interested in women rather than men, but noted that "Star Wars doesn't really have the terminology that we do ... homophobia as we know it doesn't really exist in the Star Wars universe".
Of Aphra's relationship with Magna Tolvan, Gillen said he imagined "This hard-bitten, kind of very serious kind of person chasing down this more whimsical person and the sexual tension ...
the flip of it is, Aphra's the person who's also pursuing Tolvan."
==
Appearances ==


===
Comics ===


====
Darth Vader (2015–2016) ====
Aphra first appeared in Star Wars:
Darth Vader #3 (March 2015), which is set after the original Star Wars film and was created by writer Kieron Gillen and artist Salvador Larroca.
Aphra's appearance in the comic is being adapted as an audiobook for release on July 21, 2020.
In the story, she is recruited by Darth Vader to aid in his schemes.
At the end of the series Vader attempts to kill Aphra, but she escapes, leaving him thinking he succeeded.
Gillen said of the story:

I was pretty sure that I was going to have to kill Aphra, you know?
Vader is very good at what he does ...
I looked at that and went, 'Wait.
Aphra has completely left a way that she can do this.'
I completely buy that Vader would fall for that because Vader gets angry.
You know what I mean?
It's almost like Aphra planned her own escape for me.
That was one moment that she kind of escaped, which is such an Aphra thing to do.

From 2015 to 2016, Aphra appeared in Star Wars:
Vader Down, a six-issue crossover comic miniseries which includes its own debut issue, issues #13–15 of Darth Vader, and issues #13–14 of the Star Wars comic series.
Concurrent with the Darth Vader series, in 2016 Aphra also appeared in the Rebel Jail arc of the Star Wars comic, which comprises Star Wars issues #16–19.
====
Doctor Aphra (2016–2019) ====
After first being teased in September 2016 as Star Wars: Classified
, Star Wars:
Doctor Aphra was announced in October 2016, and began to be released in December 2016.
The story picks up after Vader's attempt to kill Aphra at the end of the Darth Vader series.
She is in hiding so that Vader will not discover that she is alive, but needs to get back into her life as an archaeologist
so she can repay her enormous debts to the Wookiee Black Krrsantan, and fulfill her promise to help locate the people who tortured him in the past.
Gillen said he wanted to write the series to explore "what makes her tick and why she's doing what she's doing".
Gillen wrote issues #1 to #13, and then cowrote #14 to #19 with Simon Spurrier.
Spurrier took over for a departing Gillen as of #20.
Larroca and Kev Walker shared the artwork for issue #1, with Walker doing it alone for #2 and #3, followed by Walker and various other artists rotating in and out of the series.
According to Spurrier:
The particular beauty and the particular attraction of something like Aphra is that ...
we all grew up with Star Wars and we all love that world
and we recognize it
and we respond to its particular aesthetic and its particular vibe.
But at the same time, Aphra is very much in her own funny little niche and off doing her own thing and, yes, occasionally overlapping with stuff in the wider universe in a way that always feels like a cute Easter egg rather than a continuity obstacle ...
She's the thing that allows us as comic creators, especially in a shared universe, to tell very different, very unique stories that you just couldn't necessarily get away with, with any of the more mainstream characters and groups.

The series was nominated for Outstanding Comic Book at the 30th GLAAD Media Awards.
Alan Scherstuhl of Slate wrote of the series, "The stories, like Death Stars, tend to explode, but unpredictably so, with escalating twists, striking moral quandaries, and only occasionally anything like a truly happy ending."
He explains, "Besides the vigorous storytelling and startling twists, the Doctor Aphra comics ... fill in shades of gray that are otherwise missing from Star Wars' moral spectrum."
Jesse Schedeen of IGN called Doctor Aphra "Marvel's riskiest Star Wars project to date", but noted that "the distance from the movies gives Doctor Aphra a greater sense of freedom in terms of tone, style and plot possibilities."
Schedeen described the series as "very much like a Bizarro Han Solo story with a dash of Indiana Jones thrown in", and noted that it "thrives on its dark sense of humor.
"In
2017
, Aphra appeared in the five-issue crossover miniseries The Screaming Citadel, which is made up of its own debut issue, issues #31–32 of Star Wars, and issues #7–8 of Doctor Aphra.
The initial Doctor Aphra series ended in December 2019 with issue #40.
She is also the main subject of in the short comic "Epilogue", collected in the Empire
Ascendant one-shot comic, which is in turn collected in the thirteenth volume of Marvel's Star Wars series.

In 2020, the series won a GLAAD Media Award for Outstanding Comic Book.
====
Doctor Aphra (2020) ====
Doctor Aphra relaunched in 2020, and is set between The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi.
The first issue was scheduled for April, but all Marvel titles were delayed as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
The first issue was instead released digitally on May 3 (in recognition of Star Wars Day) and was physically released on May 27.

====
Other comics ====
Aphra also appears in flashbacks in issues of the 2019 comic Star Wars: Galaxy's Edge, as well as in the first issue of the 2020 comic Star Wars: Bounty Hunters.

===
Audiobook ===
An expanded audiobook adaptation of Aphra's introduction in the Darth Vader series, titled Doctor Aphra:
An Audiobook Original, was released on July 21, 2020.
Written by Sarah Kuhn, the audio drama added new scenes and featured a full voice cast.
The script will be released in book form on April 6, 2021.
===
Short story ===


====
"The Trigger" (2017) ====
"The Trigger" is a short story written by Gillen, published in the 2017 Star Wars anthology From a Certain Point of View.
Set during the 1977 Star Wars film on the day that the Empire destroys the planet Alderaan with the Death Star, the story finds Aphra captured by Imperial troops and reacting to the news of Alderaan's destruction.
Slate noted:

Her reaction to the news is complex: She's awed, even a little turned on, at the thought of such destructive might.
She annoys the Imperials by excitedly gaming out what tech could have possibly achieved it.
She wonders aloud whether the Death Star has a "trigger"—whether any one person flipped the switch that murdered billions.
She wonders if killing that many from a distance is easier than killing one person in front of you.

Gillen said he wrote the story with the intent of "working out a fairly logical reason, why with her background, she thinks the Empire is bad to the alternative.
If you grew up in a galactic civil war, I think peace by any means might be better than war.
That's kind of Aphra's take.
Aphra can handle everything.
She lies to herself.
But normal people?
Normal people would probably like to live under a fascist regime rather than actually people just killing each other in a war.
And that's a really dark hole to think about
but I can buy someone believing that with Aphra's background."

===
Video game ===
Doctor Aphra was a playable character in the 2017 player versus player real-time strategy mobile game, Star Wars: Force Arena.

==
Impact and reception ==
Increased sales of Darth Vader #3 convinced Gillen of Doctor Aphra's instant popularity, and he called the character "a big part" of the unexpected success of the Darth Vader series.
Aphra became a breakout character, and was placed in her own series, Doctor Aphra, which is the first ongoing Marvel Star Wars comic focused on an original character not from the films.
Gillen said in April 2018, "[Doctor Aphra] was the number two trade in February.
A completely new character selling that well is shocking in comics.
That kind of response is enormously impressive, as it doesn't happen often."
He added, "Sal[vador Larroca] and I cooked her up but enough people have written her now to make [her] bigger than me.
She definitely feels like she's outgrown me, essentially.
So I quite like giving her away to other people who'll get to play with her.
"
Aphra has also become a popular cosplay.
Gillen said of Aphra's popularity:
Of all the characters I've created for other people's universes, she's by far the most successful one ...
She's kind of fun
but at the same time, there's a really dark heart to her ...
All those weird kind of contradictions to her
, I think they're quite appealing.
At the same time, she's got a very core thing people can get.
She's quite complicated and not complicated at all.
With Luke or Leia, they've got that core archetype you get, you get what they're like.
You get that with Aphra but at the same time, there's an underlying ...
all this weird, twisted stuff in there that kind of gets under people's skin."

Spurrier added:

Most of what we've seen so far in Star Wars is goodies versus baddies.
And Aphra ain't that.
And I would suggest that the reason people ... respond more to Han Solo than they respond to Luke Skywalker is because he's not just playing the goodie.
He's a little more complicated than that.
And Aphra is 100% the same but from the other direction."

Trent Moore of SyFy Wire deemed Aphra "arguably the best thing" about the Darth Vader series, and Catrina Dennis of StarWars.com called her "the type of character that steals every scene
she's in."
Hanna Flint of SyFy Wire described Aphra "an edgy, cool and refreshingly diverse character", and Bria Lavorgna of StarWars.com called her "one of the coolest characters in Star Wars right now."
Noting that Aphra's first appearance was an homage to Indiana Jones, Alan Scherstuhl of Slate said that she subsequently "gains a depth that Indiana Jones never quite did", and praised the fact that Gillen has "never exploited or exoticized her sexuality."
Citing Aphra's "feats of technological prowess coupled with her unpredictable personality" as the characteristics which "make her a character worth watching", Dennis wrote, "Aphra has stolen the hearts of fans everywhere with her unpredictable humor and a complicated backstory that has unfolded into something much more than her introduction to the saga may have let on."
==
Merchandising ==
In 2018, Hasbro released an action figure set of Doctor Aphra and her two killer droids, 0-0-0 and BT-1.
==
References ==


==
External links ==
Chelli Lona Aphra / Doctor Aphra on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Star Wars:
Doctor Aphra on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Grand Admiral Thrawn (native name: Mitth'raw'nuruodo; birth name: Kivu'raw'nuru) is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise.
Introduced in the 1991 Timothy Zahn novel Heir to the Empire, he is an Imperial military commander who has taken control of the Galactic Empire's remaining forces five years after the events of the 1983 film Return of the Jedi.
Thrawn faces off against classic Star Wars characters Luke Skywalker, Princess Leia, Han Solo, Chewbacca, and Lando Calrissian in the Thrawn trilogy (1991–1993), but is ultimately defeated.
He is seemingly resurrected in the Hand of Thrawn duology (1997–98), and his backstory is explored in various other novels, short stories, comics, and video games in the Star Wars Expanded Universe.

Lucasfilm rebranded the Expanded Universe works as Star Wars Legends in 2014 and declared them non-canon to the franchise, but Thrawn was reintroduced back into the canon in the third season of the 3D CGI animated television series Star Wars Rebels, where he was voiced by Lars Mikkelsen.
Rebels is set at a point in the Star Wars timeline earlier than Thrawn's storylines in the Legends continuity and, as such, sees his defeat much earlier on, shortly before the events of the original 1977 film Star Wars.
Despite this, the character is mentioned as still being alive in the second season of the live-action web television series The Mandalorian (2020), which takes place a few years after Return of the Jedi, much like the original Thrawn stories from Legends.
The character is also featured in a new Thrawn book trilogy by Zahn, consisting of Star Wars: Thrawn (2017), Thrawn: Alliances (2018) and Thrawn: Treason (2019).
Another book trilogy, called Thrawn Ascendancy, began in September 2020 with Book I
: Chaos Rising and Book II:
Greater Good to be released in April 2021.

Thrawn has been one of the most significant and popular characters in the Legends continuity, and is regarded by many as the greatest military mind in Legends.
Several Star Wars action figures and other merchandising have been produced of the character.

==
Character ==
Thrawn first appeared in the 1991 Timothy Zahn novel Heir to the Empire, the first installment of what became known as the Thrawn trilogy.
He is a grand admiral in the Imperial Navy, and categorically "the most brilliant of the Emperor's minions".
A member of the alien Chiss species, Thrawn is described as a tall, solidly built humanoid with blue skin and glowing red eyes who wears the white uniform befitting his rank.
He has risen in power thanks to his "tactical brilliance and cunning", and has been described as "one of the most threatening antagonists" in the Star Wars universe.
He is an unparalleled military strategist and tactical genius who has made extensive study of military intelligence and the artwork of other cultures, and the Thrawn trilogy finds him commanding the remnants of the Imperial Fleet in a series of stunning victories against the New Republic.
His full name was given as Mitth'raw'nuruodo.

IGN described the character as "diabolical, brilliant and ruthless".
Zahn describes Thrawn's command style as considerably different from that of Darth Vader and other typical Imperial commanders; instead of punishing failure and dissent, Thrawn promotes creativity among his crew and accepts ideas from subordinates.
Zahn said in 2017:
Most of the Imperial leaders we see in the movies rule through a combination of fear and manipulation.
I wanted to create something different: a commander who could lead through loyalty.
The result was Thrawn, a tactical genius whose troops follow him willingly, and who will fight for him whether or not he's watching over their shoulders.

Referencing Zahn's annotations in the 20th Anniversary Edition of Heir to the Empire, John Booth wrote in Wired that Zahn "created and developed Thrawn as a character [by] deliberately establishing the Grand Admiral as a villain who leads not by coercion and fear but through valuing strategy and loyalty".
Zahn explained in 2008 that Thrawn's version of the Empire is different than that of Palpatine because Thrawn does not have Palpatine's megalomania and xenophobia.
Calling Thrawn and Mara Jade his favorite of the characters he created, Zahn noted in 2006 that writing the Grand Admiral "provides the intellectual challenge of trying to come up with new, clever, and (hopefully) workable tactics and strategies".

===
Portrayal ===
Thrawn is voiced by Tris King in the 1994 computer game Star Wars:
TIE Fighter, and by Tim Russell in the 1997 audio drama Dark Forces: Soldier for the Empire.
In seasons three and four of Star Wars Rebels, Thrawn is voiced by Lars Mikkelsen.

==
Appearances ==


===
Legends works ===
According to Zahn, Lou Aronica of Bantam Spectra had negotiated a book deal with Lucasfilm in 1989, and the publisher put Zahn's name at the top of their list of possible authors.
He said, "My original instructions from LucasArts  [sic] consisted of exactly two rules: the books were to start 3–5 years after Return of the Jedi, and I couldn't use anyone who'd been explicitly killed off in the movies."
Zahn used information from the original film trilogy as his primary source, but supplemented that with details from the many sourcebooks created for West End Games' Star Wars: The Roleplaying Game, saying that they "saved me from having to reinvent the wheel many times".
In turn, each novel in the trilogy had its role-playing game sourcebook created for it by West End Games.
Introduced in the Thrawn trilogy (1991–93), Thrawn became a fan favorite and subsequently appeared in multiple works in what became known as the Star Wars Expanded Universe, including novels, comics and video games, through 2006.
He is often cited as one of the most popular characters in the franchise.
Star Wars Rebels
executive producer Dave Filoni said of the character in 2016, "You couldn't have grown up a Star Wars fan without encountering Thrawn in Heir to the Empire.
It was a dark time when there weren't any more movies, and it blew our minds that there could be more.
"
The Thrawn trilogy itself is widely credited with reviving interest in the Star Wars franchise.
In 2010, Star Wars: The Clone Wars creator Filoni expressed interest in using Thrawn in that series.
Some fans of Zahn's Thrawn series had long hoped the books would be adapted, and after the 2012 announcement that The Walt Disney Company had acquired Lucasfilm and planned to produce film sequels to Return of the Jedi, Zahn commented that if material from the expanded universe was used in the films, "we'd all be thrilled to death".
With the 2012 acquisition of Lucasfilm by Disney, most of the licensed Star Wars novels and comics produced since the originating 1977 film Star Wars were rebranded as Star Wars Legends and declared non-canon to the franchise in April 2014.
Though Lucasfilm made it clear that new media would "not tell the same story told in the post-Return of the Jedi Expanded Universe", it was also established that "creators of new Star Wars entertainment have full access to the rich content of the Expanded Universe."
Acknowledging that Thrawn had long been considered by Lucasfilm when developing projects, Filoni later said in 2016 that in particular the character had been on his list of potential villains when developing Star Wars Rebels.

====
Thrawn trilogy (1991–1993) ====
The Thrawn trilogy, also known as the Heir to the Empire trilogy, was written by Timothy Zahn between 1991 and 1993.
In addition to Thrawn, the trilogy introduced several notable characters, including Mara Jade and Talon Karrde.
Approximately five years after the events depicted in Return of the Jedi, the Rebel Alliance, now known as the New Republic, has driven out the remnants of the old Imperial Starfleet to a distant corner of the galaxy and is attempting to set up a functional government.
Princess Leia and Han Solo are married and expecting twins.
Luke Skywalker has become the first in a long-awaited new line of Jedi Knights.
Thousands of light years away, Grand Admiral Thrawn, the last and most brilliant of the 12 grand admirals, has taken command of the shattered Imperial Fleet and prepared it to attack the New Republic.
Thrawn is searching for a Dark Jedi to join his side and is confident he can restore the Empire.

In Heir to the Empire (1991), master tactician Grand Admiral Thrawn plots to destroy the New Republic despite their numerical advantage over the remaining Imperial forces.
He sets his sights on the Wayland storehouse of the late Emperor Palpatine, which contains a massive array of Spaarti cloning cylinders and a working cloaking shield.
To this end, Thrawn and his subordinate Gilad Pellaeon, captain of the Star Destroyer Chimaera, enlist the help of smuggler Talon Karrde and his second-in-command Mara Jade to obtain several salamander-like creatures called ysalamiri.
Thrawn uses the ysalamiri, which possess the natural ability to disrupt the Force, to subdue the storehouse's guardian Joruus C'baoth, a twisted clone of a Jedi Master whom the Grand Admiral had killed years before.
C'baoth offers his allegiance in exchange for two acolytes to bend to his will: Darth Vader's twin children, Luke and Leia.
Thrawn sends some of his Noghri killers to capture Luke and a pregnant Leia, but their attempts repeatedly fail.
Leia defends herself from one attack and is surprised when the Noghri suddenly surrenders.
Thrawn launches his first offensive, a series of hit-and-run attacks into New Republic territory, and then steals a complement of mole miners from Lando Calrissian's mining operations on Nkllon.
In need of warships, and with his previous tactics having forced over 100 lightly manned ships to be stationed at the Sluis Van shipyards as he planned, Thrawn invades.
His stormtroopers use the stolen miners to board and hijack the ships, but they are thwarted when Lando can seize control of the miners remotely.
The Grand Admiral withdraws his forces, but thanks to Thrawn's plotting, his New Republic nemesis Admiral Ackbar is soon arrested for treason.
Dark Force Rising (1992) reveals that before the Clone Wars, the Old Republic had constructed a fleet of highly automated heavy cruisers, known as the Katana fleet.
A virus infected the crews of the entire fleet and drove them insane.
The fleet was never seen again until smuggler Talon Karrde discovered it (several years before the events of the first book).
With access to Palpatine's private storehouse on the planet
Wayland, Thrawn presses his advantage to marshal more forces for the battle against the New Republic.
Mara Jade, in an attempt to exonerate the Empire's warrant for Karrde's arrest, goes to Thrawn and offers to reveal the location of the Katana fleet.
Instead, he has her followed and Karrde is captured.
Mara and Luke rescue Karrde from Thrawn's Star Destroyer as Thrawn attempts to capture another man who knows about the Katana fleet.
Meanwhile, Leia learns that the Noghri serve the Empire because they revere her late father, the insidious Vader, who they believe saved their planet Honoghr from ecological disaster.
Leia convinces them that they have been deceived and effectively enslaved by the Empire, and they switch sides.
With Ackbar temporarily neutralized as a tactical opponent, Thrawn leads an army of clones to claim the so-called "Katana fleet", outmaneuvering Luke, Lando, and Han Solo.
In The Last Command (1993), set about a month after the previous book, Thrawn uses the Katana fleet, manned with clones, to mount a successful offensive against the New Republic.
Seizing one planet after the other, the Grand Admiral soon immobilizes the galactic capital world, Coruscant.
He has placed multiple cloaked asteroids around the planet, and through a ruse, he has led the New Republic leadership to believe that Coruscant is surrounded with them.
Learning of the deception, the Republic fleet attacks the Imperial shipyards at Bilbringi to capture a device that can find the cloaked asteroids, but Thrawn's forces intercept and surround them.
Meanwhile, Luke and Leia lead a group to destroy the cloning facility on Wayland, successfully killing Joruus C'baoth and destroying the cloning cylinders.
Just as Thrawn and Pellaeon learn that the Noghri aided in the attack on Wayland, Thrawn's Noghri bodyguard, Rukh, kills the Grand Admiral—whose last words are, "But ... it was so artistically done.
"
The tide of battle at Bilbringi turns, and with the hope of victory dashed by Thrawn's death, Pellaeon orders the Imperial forces to retreat.
Denis Lawson narrates the abridged audiobook of Heir to the Empire, and Anthony Daniels narrates Dark Force Rising and The Last Command.
Lucasfilm and Varèse Sarabande Records producer Robert Townson discussed the creation of a score to promote the trilogy.
All three books were adapted as comic books by Dark Horse Comics between 1995 and 1998.
The series was divided into six issues per book, written by Mike Baron, who says, "I didn't invent any language.
All the language is Zahn's.
"
The first volume was illustrated by French artists Olivier Vatine and Fred Blanchard, the second by Terry Dodson and Kevin Nowlan, and the third by Edvin Biuković and Eric Shanower.
The entire trilogy was collected in 2009 as a single graphic novel.
Heir to the Empire reached #1 on the New York Times Best Seller list, and the trilogy sold a combined total of 15 million copies.
The Thrawn trilogy is widely credited with revitalizing the Star Wars franchise.
In The Secret History of Star Wars, Michael Kaminski suggests that this renewed interest was a factor in George Lucas' decision to create the prequel trilogy.
It has been called "influential, much-loved, and ground breaking".
In August 2011, the series was voted into NPR's top 100 science-fiction and fantasy books (coming in at place 88), as voted on by over 60,000 participants.

====
The Hand of Thrawn duology (1997–1998) ====
Zahn's Specter of the Past (1997) finds Thrawn seemingly resurrected ten years after his death when he reappears to lead the decimated Imperial forces against the unstable New Republic.
A record surfaces called the Caamasi Document, which indicates that a small group of Bothans were perpetrators in the tragic destruction of the planet Caamas and causes more than a hundred alien warships to gather in orbit over the Bothans' homeworld, which the Empire hopes to use to its benefit.

In Vision of the Future (1998), Admiral Gilad Pellaeon admits that the Empire, down to only a few sectors, is now fighting a losing battle, and initiates peace talks with Princess Leia.
However, Moff Disra hires a con artist, Flim, to impersonate the deceased Grand Admiral Thrawn to motivate the Imperial forces.
Major Grodin Tierce, the clone of a former stormtrooper imbued with Thrawn's tactical intellect by the grand admiral himself, strategizes that the false Thrawn could also rally support for the Empire and intimidate the New Republic.
The tactic is successful until Pellaeon and Talon Karrde—on opposing sides but both desiring peace—expose Flim.
Meanwhile, at a fortress called the Hand of Thrawn, Luke and Mara discover a gestating and near-complete clone of Thrawn, which is killed during their escape.
An expedition by Thrawn to the galaxy's Unknown Regions is also mentioned.
Finally, a peace treaty is signed by Pellaeon and the New Republic's president.

====
Other works ====


=====
Novels =====
Thrawn appears as a captain in the 1997 William C. Dietz novella Dark Forces: Soldier for the Empire.
He also appears in the 1998 young reader's book Galaxy of Fear: The Swarm.

Before the theatrical release of Attack of the Clones, Lucasfilm suggested that Zahn write a prequel-era book.
Zahn decided to have his 2004 novel Survivor's Quest (the sequel to The Hand of Thrawn duology) cover the end of the Outbound Flight story arc before exploring its beginning in his prequel novel.
In Survivor's Quest, Luke and Mara journey to investigate the wreckage of Outbound Flight, a Jedi expedition destroyed by Thrawn years before.
Newly discovered by the Chiss, the remains turn out to be the lure in a trap laid by the bloodthirsty Vagaari to avenge themselves on the Chiss.
Zahn's 2006 novel Outbound Flight is set fifty years before Survivor's Quest.
It follows the story of the doomed titular expedition, led by Jedi Master Jorus C'baoth, that is attacked by a young Chiss commander named Mitth'raw'nuruodo—informally known as Thrawn.
In the story, a Republic fleet comes across the Chiss for the first time.
The alien commander, Thrawn, can handily defeat the Republic ships despite inferior weapons and numbers.
Supreme Chancellor Palpatine seeks to destroy the Outbound Flight, and he and his agent Kinman Doriana convince Thrawn that the ship and its Jedi pose a threat to the peaceful future of the galaxy.
Thrawn agrees, hoping to get C'baoth to turn back before taking more drastic action.
The Jedi refuses and Thrawn fires on the ship, but Doriana launches an assault that kills every Jedi and sends the Outbound Flight careening to its destruction on a nearby planet.
Thrawn's brother Thrass and Lorana, the sole surviving Jedi, sacrifice their lives to save what survivors they can.
Thrawn is reprimanded by his Chiss superiors for his hostile behavior, and summoned back to his home planet Csilla.
Publishers Weekly called Thrawn the "true star" of the novel, noting that his attack on the ship, secretly influenced by Palpatine's agents, "insures his own eventual exile from his race and sets other sinister wheels in motion".
Zahn said of writing the novel, "as always, it was immensely fun to play tactics with Thrawn".
Though StarWars.com suggests that in Outbound Flight, Thrawn is "too smart and basically decent to become the servant of Palpatine that he later becomes", Zahn explains:

My sense has always been that [Thrawn] was manipulating Palpatine just as much as Palpatine is manipulating him.
After all, he only came to the Empire so that he could gain command rank, collect all the military hardware Palpatine was willing to give him, and then get himself kicked back out to the Unknown Regions.

Set between Star Wars:
A New Hope and
The Empire Strikes Back, Zahn's Choices of One (2011) pits Thrawn against the alien warlord Nuso Esva, his nemesis from the Unknown Regions.

=====
Short stories =====
Thrawn, exiled by the Chiss to an inhospitable planet, is found by the Imperial Captain Voss Parck in "Mist Encounter" a short story by Zahn that was originally published in Star Wars Adventure Journal #7 (August 1995).
Parck realizes Thrawn's value as a strategist and decides to bring him to the Emperor.
In "Command Decision", a November 1996 short story by Zahn published in Star Wars Adventure Journal #11, Thrawn is an admiral in the Imperial Navy with Parck as his subordinate.
Thrawn orchestrates a plan to locate a Rebel base in "Side Trip" by Zahn and Michael A. Stackpole, published in Star Wars Adventure Journal #12 (February 1997) and #13 (May 1997), and reprinted in the November 1997 anthology Tales from the Empire.
The success of this mission earns him the command of Darth Vader's Noghri commandos.
Zahn's novella Crisis of Faith, published with the 20th Anniversary Edition of Heir to the Empire on September 6, 2011, is set immediately before Heir to the Empire and finds Thrawn finally able to defeat Nuso Esva.
=====
Comics =====
Trade paperbacks:
Heir to the Empire (collects Star Wars: Heir to the Empire #1–6, 160 pages, September 1996, ISBN 1-56971-202-6)
Dark Force Rising (collects Star Wars: Dark Force Rising #1–6, 160 pages, February 1998
, ISBN 1-56971-269-7)
The Last Command (collects Star Wars: The Last Command #1–6, 144 pages, June 1999, ISBN 1-56971-378-2)
The Thrawn Trilogy (collects Star Wars: Heir to the Empire #1–6,
Star Wars:
Dark Force Rising #1–6, and Star Wars:
The Last Command #1–6, 420 pages, December 2009, ISBN 1-59582-417-0)In the 1997 Dark Horse comic X-wing Rogue Squadron 25:
The Making of Baron Fel, set four years after A New Hope, Imperial pilot Soontir Fel participates in an ambush on a Rebel convoy.
He realizes that the operation was planned by the "alien Admiral" Thrawn, who is given no acknowledgement by Vader or the Emperor.
Fel understands that such reliance on an alien undercuts the xenophobic foundation of the Empire, and Thrawn goes unrewarded after the successful mission.
=====
Video games =====
In the "Tour of Duty III" segment of the 1994 space flight simulator/combat computer game Star Wars: TIE Fighter, then-Vice Admiral Thrawn establishes order in a "wild" system at the frontiers of the Empire.
The game expansion packs Defender of the Empire and Enemies of the Empire
follow the story of how Thrawn thwarts the efforts of the traitorous Grand Admiral Zaarin to depose the Emperor, and Thrawn is promoted to Grand Admiral in his place.
Thrawn is also a recruitable character for The Empire in the 1998 strategy computer game Star Wars: Rebellion, and later appears in Forces of Corruption expansion pack for the 2006 real-time strategy game
Star Wars: Empire at War.
Thrawn cameos in Star Wars Battlefront:
Renegade Squadron as a "Leader" character for the Galactic Empire in Galactic Conquest, earned by conquering all planets in the Northern Quadrant of the map and allows an army to move twice in one turn if the first move is begun within said quadrant.
This power is shared with Admiral Ackbar for the Rebel Alliance.

He is also a collectible character in the 2015 mobile collectible Role-playing video game, Galaxy of Heroes.

===
Canon works ===


====
Star Wars Rebels (2016–2018) ====
With the sequel film Star Wars: The Force Awakens in production, in April 2014 most of the licensed Star Wars novels and comics produced since the 1977 film Star Wars were declared non-canon to the franchise.
However, Star Wars Rebels executive producer Dave Filoni announced at the London Star Wars Celebration in July 2016 that Thrawn would be reintroduced into the franchise in the third season of the Rebels series.
The character debuted in the season 3 premiere, "Steps into Shadow", which aired on September 24, 2016.Though in Legends
works
Thrawn was mostly used in post-Return of the Jedi storylines, Rebels takes place within the five years before the events of the original 1977 film.
After seeing an advanced clip from the series, Zahn told StarWars.com, "even that short bit was awesome, and just a bit surrealistic.
Authors don't get to see our creations come to life very often, and it was a real treat to see a walking, talking Grand Admiral Thrawn".
Acknowledging that Thrawn had long been considered by Lucasfilm when developing projects, Filoni said that in particular, the character had been on his list of potential villains when developing Rebels.
He explained that unlike how the character Ahsoka Tano has been a foil for Darth Vader in previous seasons of Rebels, "There's no one to defend [the Rebels] against Thrawn.
We want to treat him like a big-time villain, as much as Darth Vader, but on the strategic, military side of things."
=====
Storylines =====
In "Steps into Shadow", Thrawn is the commander of the Seventh Fleet, recently promoted to Grand Admiral for crushing a rebel insurgency on Batonn without regard for civilian casualties.
He is brought in by Imperial Governor Arihnda Pryce to help destroy the series' eponymous rebel cell.
A patient tactician, Thrawn allows the rebels to escape, intending to manipulate them into orchestrating the complete downfall of their rebellion.
In "Hera's Heroes", he takes command of the Imperial occupation of Ryloth, home planet of Hera Syndulla, and has his first face-to-face contact with the rebels.
He reappears in "Iron Squadron", where he orders the incompetent Admiral Konstantine to deal with rebels and rebel sympathizers in the Mykapo system; after Konstantine's ship is disabled, Thrawn arrives in his personal Star Destroyer, the Chimaera, and is revealed to have previously encountered rebel Commander Jun Sato.
"
An Inside Man" reveals Thrawn now in charge of the Imperial occupation of the planet Lothal, overseeing the factory where the new TIE Defender and various other pieces of equipment are manufactured.
He puts an end to rebel acts of sabotage by enforcing a policy of the workers testing their creations and is also shown to be studying pieces of artwork that grant insight into each member of the Ghost crew.
He also determines that there is a rebel spy within the Imperial ranks, but intends to use this to his advantage.
In "Warhead", Thrawn uses probe droids to determine that Sato's hidden rebel base is located on one of less than a hundred planets.
Thrawn is shown to be skilled in hand-to-hand combat in "Through Imperial Eyes", and learns that Agent Kallus is the rebel spy.
In "Secret Cargo", Thrawn and Pryce pursue Senator Mon Mothma, who is being transported to safety by the rebels after speaking out publicly against Palpatine.
In "Zero Hour", Thrawn confronts Kallus about being Fulcrum, and executes his carefully planned attack on the rebel base on Atollon.
He is thwarted by the ingenuity of the rebels and the assistance of Bendu, who cryptically warns Thrawn of his impending defeat, "like many arms surrounding you in a cold embrace".
In the series finale "Family Reunion and Farewell", Thrawn's Star Destroyer is attacked by Purrgil while hovering over Lothal.
Ensnared in the creatures' tentacles while simultaneously being confronted by the Force-wielding Ezra Bridger, who brought the Purrgil to defend Lothal, the Star Destroyer is dragged from the planet's vicinity by them, leaving both Thrawn's and Bridger's fates unknown.

====
Thrawn trilogy (2017–2019) ====
In a prerecorded video also presented at the July 2016 London Star Wars Celebration, Zahn announced that he was writing a new novel titled Star Wars: Thrawn, which was released by Del Rey Books in April 2017.
According to Zahn, it was "very exciting" to write the character again, and he noted that "with this book I'll be visiting a part of his life that I never before had a chance to explore".
Zahn later said, "I get to show how he's treated by his fellow officers and shipmates on his way up the military ladder, particularly when he's not in a command position over them.
"Although
in Legends works
Thrawn was mostly placed in post-Return of the Jedi storylines, Thrawn is set before the events of the original 1977 film.
It covers several years between Thrawn's "first encounter" with the Empire and the events of the third season of Rebels, chronicling his rise to power.
In the novel, exiled Chiss warrior Thrawn is rescued by Imperial soldiers, and soon proves a valuable asset to the Empire.
His cunning and expertise as a tactician soon attract the attention of Emperor Palpatine, though Thrawn's renegade tactics ignite the ire of his superiors.
As he rises in rank, Thrawn trains his aide-de-camp Ensign Eli Vanto in the ways of war, and finds himself in an uneasy alliance with ruthless administrator Arihnda Pryce.
A comic book miniseries adaptation of the first novel by Marvel Comics began in early 2018.
A sequel to the novel, titled Thrawn: Alliances, was released on July 24, 2018.
A third novel, Thrawn: Treason, was released on July 23, 2019.

====
Thrawn Ascendancy trilogy (2020–2021) ====
At the 2019 New York Comic Con, a new trilogy from Timothy Zahn was announced, to be entitled Thrawn:
The Ascendency Trilogy, or simply the Thrawn Ascendancy trilogy, to launch with Book I: Chaos Rising in May 2020.
After being delayed twice, the first novel was ultimately released on September 1, 2020.
In the novel, it was revealed that Thrawn was born as Kivu'raw'nuru (core name Vurawn) before being adopted by the Mitth family, changing his name to Mitth'raw'nuru (core name Thrawn).
The novel also covered more of Thrawn's backstory alongside other Chiss characters, such as Ar'alani, that also appeared in Thrawn:
Treason, the previous novel by publication order.
In October 2020 a sequel to Chaos Rising was announced, titled Greater Good, which is set for a May 4, 2021 release.

====
The Mandalorian (2020) ====
Grand Admiral Thrawn is mentioned by Ahsoka Tano in "Chapter 13:
The Jedi" as the master to the Magistrate of Corvus, confirming that he survived the events of Star Wars Rebels and is still alive as of five years after Return of the Jedi and four years after the Empire's downfall.

====
Other works ====
Thrawn is mentioned in the 2017 Chuck Wendig novel Star Wars:
Aftermath: Empire's End as the source of the information about the Unknown Regions which Palpatine uses in his Contingency plan.
This plan results in the creation of the First Order.

=====
Video games =====
Thrawn appears as a playable character in the 2017 real-time strategy mobile game Star Wars: Force Arena, and was later introduced to Star Wars: Galaxy of Heroes, a turn-based role-playing game, that summer, as both a special event boss and playable character.

== Reception ==
In 2016, Anthony Breznican of Entertainment Weekly called Thrawn a "fan favorite" and "one of the most significant characters to ever emerge from the Expanded Universe", and Brian Truitt of USA Today named the character "one of Star Wars fandom's favorite villains".
Comicbook.com called Thrawn "arguably the most popular character in the Star Wars Legends universe" in 2017, and Linda Hansen-Raj wrote that the character "carries a lasting legacy as one of Star Wars' greatest and most complex antagonists.
"
In 2014, GamesRadar's Sam Ashurst called Thrawn "hugely popular amongst fans, partly because of his tactical genius, partly because of his progressive attitude to his employees but mainly due to the fact he's got a blue face" and "easily the coolest villain in the Expanded Universe", noting Thrawn's loss as one of the major consequences of Lucasfilm's abandonment of the old expanded universe for Star Wars: The Force Awakens.
Emmet Asher-Perrin of Tor.com noted in 2016 that as "one of the most popular Expanded Universe villains" and "one of the most threatening antagonists that the Star Wars universe had on hand", the character's removal from canon continuity "had many fans crying
foul".
In 2008, Jesse Schedeen of IGN credited Thrawn and the Thrawn trilogy with "kickstarting" the Star Wars expanded universe", and in 2015 Empire suggested that Thrawn's character helped "revitalize and legitimise" the expanded universe when it was failing.
Eric Goldman wrote for IGN in 2008, "Diabolical, brilliant and ruthless, Thrawn was an excellent Star Wars villain, following in the footsteps of the likes of Grand Moff Tarkin," adding that "his status as the highest ranking non-human in the Empire was a very interesting aspect".
In 2006, Zahn called Thrawn and Mara Jade his favorite of the characters he created.
Zahn said in July 2016, "A writer never knows which characters are going to click with the readers, and it was highly gratifying to me that Thrawn captured the imaginations of so many people over the past quarter century.
"The
character has been on many "top" lists of Star Wars characters, praising his villainy and character.
In a list of fifteen Star Wars villains, Schedeen placed Thrawn as second best, beaten by Darth Vader, focusing on his greatness as a commander and tactician.
In 2008, IGN ranked him as the tenth best overall Star Wars character, noting his influence in the expanded universe, and UGO listed him as the third greatest expanded universe character the same year.
Empire listed Thrawn fifth in their list of the 25 best of the more obscure Star Wars characters in 2015.In November 2016, Lars Mikkelsen was nominated for a 2017 Annie Award for Outstanding Achievement, Voice Acting in an Animated Feature Production for his portrayal of Thrawn on Star Wars Rebels.

==
Merchandising ==
An Admiral Thrawn 3 ​3⁄4 inch action figure was produced by Kenner/Hasbro as part of their 1998 Power of the Force 2 Expanded Universe line.
Another figure was released for the 2008 Legacy Collection, bundled in a "Comic 2-Pack" with a Talon Karrde figure and a Dark Horse Heir of the Empire issue #1 comic.
Two versions of Thrawn were produced for the Star Wars Miniatures collectible miniatures game: one for the 2005 Universe expansion, and a second for the 2009 Imperial Entanglements expansion.
In 2010, Sideshow Collectibles released a sixth scale Thrawn figure, with a command chair as part of the deluxe version.
A 6.75" Thrawn mini bust was produced by Gentle Giant in 2014.
All representations of the character have included a pet ysalamir, except the 2009 miniature.
Hasbro released a Thrawn action figure as part of its Rebels series of figures in 2016.
In 2017, Hasbro released a 6" Thrawn figure as a part of its Black Series line, as well as a San Diego Comic Con version featuring enhanced packaging and accessories.
In the same year, Funko released the Star Wars Rebels
Grand Admiral Thrawn #170 POP!
figurine as a "2017 Galactic Convention Exclusive" related to the 2017 Star Wars Celebration.
Additionally, Lego released a Grand Admiral Thrawn minifigure, included in the 2017 set The Phantom.

==
References ==
Footnotes
Citations


==
Further reading ==
Pena, Abel G.; Wallace, Daniel (2003).
"
Who's Who: Imperial Grand Admirals".
Star Wars Insider (66).

Anderson, Kevin J.; Wallace, Daniel; Hughes, Bill (2000).
Star Wars:
The Essential Chronology (1st ed.).
New York: Del Rey.
ISBN 978-0-345-43439-5.

Wallace, Daniel (2002).
Star Wars: The New Essential Guide to Characters.
Illustrated by Michael Sutfin.
New York:
Del Rey.
pp.
185–187.
ISBN 978-0-345-44900-9.
==
External links ==
Grand Admiral Thrawn in the StarWars.com Databank
Thrawn on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Grand Admiral Thrawn at SWbooks.co.uk
Grand Admiral Thrawn on IMDb
Cad Bane is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise.
Created by George Lucas, Dave Filoni and Henry Gilroy, he made his debut as an antagonist in the 2008 animated series Star Wars:
The Clone Wars, in which he is voiced by Corey Burton.
The character is depicted as a ruthless bounty hunter from the planet Duro who is usually employed by other villains in the series, such as the Separatist Alliance and the Hutt crime families.
Known for utilising weapons and gadgets specifically designed to counter the abilities of Jedi, Cad Bane was the "preeminent blaster-for-hire" during the Clone Wars.
Aside from the television series, the character appears in several canon and non-canon Star Wars media, such as comic books and video games.
Since his first appearance in The Clone Wars, Cad Bane quickly became a fan favorite, and has been highlighted as one of the best bounty hunter characters in the franchise, usually alongside the likes of Boba Fett and Jango Fett.

==
Appearances ==


===
Television ===


====
The Clone Wars ====
Cad Bane recurs in the 2008 animated series Star Wars: The Clone Wars.
He first appears in the first season's finale "Hostage Crisis", in which he and Aurra Sing assemble a team of fellow bounty hunters to rescue Ziro the Hutt from the Republic's prison facility.
They infiltrate the Senate building on Coruscant, murdering all of the guards and taking a group of senators hostage as leverage to demand for Ziro's release.
Their plan is successful, and the bounty hunters manage to escape with Ziro, despite Anakin Skywalker's attempt to stop them.

Bane makes his first chronological appearance in the second season premiere "Holocron Heist", in which he is hired by Darth Sidious to steal a Holocron from the vault of the Jedi Temple.
He escapes with the Holocron and manages to evade Anakin Skywalker and Ahsoka Tano in "Cargo of Doom".
Bane subsequently helps Sidious use the Holocron to kidnap several Force-sensitive children in "Children of the Force" before he is captured by the Jedi.
Obi-Wan Kenobi and Mace Windu force him to take them to the Holocron, and Bane leads them into a trap in his headquarters, giving himself time to flee.

The third season explores the events leading up to Bane's takeover of the Senate building in season one.
"
Evil Plans" features Bane capturing the droids R2-D2 and C-3PO, who involuntarily give him the schematics of the Senate building.
The following episode "Hunt for Ziro", which takes place after "Hostage Crisis", reveals that Bane was hired to extract Ziro from Republic custody by Jabba the Hutt as Ziro possessed a datapad with incriminating evidence against the Hutt crime families.
Shortly after Bane is congratulated by Jabba for his success, Ziro escapes and the bounty hunter is hired to track down and capture the rogue Hutt.
He eventually finds Ziro's corpse on Teth but realises the datapad is missing.
After a short altercation with Obi-Wan Kenobi and Quinlan Vos, who were also searching for the Hutt, Bane escapes once again.

Prior to the fourth season's episode "Deception", Bane is revealed to have intentionally been captured in order to infiltrate a Republic prison; he is hired by Count Dooku to break Moralo Eval out of the facility.
Unbeknownst to them, Obi-Wan Kenobi poses as bounty hunter Rako Hardeen and seeks to gain the duo's trust to uncover Dooku's plans.
Following a successful prison break and pursuit throughout the Outer Rim, the trio finally reach The Box: a competition to decide which of a small group of chosen bounty hunters will participate in the Separatist plot to kidnap Chancellor Palpatine on Naboo.
Bane and "Hardeen" survive the events of the box and go on to kidnap the Chancellor in "Crisis on Naboo", but Kenobi's deception is soon revealed and he manages to foil the plot, leading to Bane's arrest once more.

Following the series' cancellation in 2014, creator Dave Filoni confirmed that Bane was slated to return in an unfinished story arc which saw him and a group of bounty hunters mentoring the young Boba Fett, helping him follow in his late father's footsteps.
The end of the arc would see Bane and Fett having a standoff, which presumably resulted in the former's death.

====
Rebels ====
Years after the Clone Wars came to an end, Sabine Wren somehow heard of Cad Bane, and designed a graffiti image of him, inspired by his daring combat skills.
This image can be briefly seen in the second episode of the first season of Star Wars Rebels, "Fighter Flight".
===
Comics ===
Bane also appears in the five-part Marvel Comics comic book miniseries Star Wars:
Darth Maul, set before the events of the prequel trilogy, where he aides the titular character in kidnapping a Jedi Padawan.
===
Legends ===
In April 2014, most of the licensed Star Wars novels and comics produced since the originating 1977 film Star Wars were rebranded as Star Wars Legends and declared non-canon to the rest of the franchise by Lucasfilm.
Cad Bane has appeared in several comics and video games set in the Legends continuity.
==
Characteristics ==


===
Character creation ===
The character was created as a recurring antagonist for the 2008 Star Wars: The Clone Wars television series set during the prequel film trilogy.
The season one finale "Hostage Crisis" director Giancarlo Volpe compared Cad Bane to another Star Wars bounty hunter, Boba Fett, stating:

The crew loves Cad Bane, and I really think the fans will, too.
He brings a serious bad-ass sensibility to Star Wars.
He's a lethal and ruthless bounty hunter, and you see that right away in the episode.
Unlike Boba Fett, Cad doesn't take prisoners.

Originally, supervising director Dave Filoni and series writer Henry Gilroy planned to create the Durge character that was already introduced in the 2003 micro-series.
Durge would instead be redesigned as a human character but this exploration was short lived after the suggestion of series producer and Star Wars creator George Lucas to go Western.
Lucas took inspiration from western film actors such as Lee Van Cleef's portrayals of Angel Eyes in The Good, The Bad, and the Ugly and of Colonel Mortimer in For a Few Dollars More while Corey Burton uses Peter Lorre's voice as inspiration.
These characters' Western influences help to bring Bane to life while still containing the features of the Duros species in the Star Wars universe with his own original characterization.
Burton's voice would then be modified on the computer by the series' sound production team.
While Filoni researched the character, he happened to come across an unlabeled concept art of a gun-toting bounty hunter with a wide-brimmed hat from the original trilogy and that concept helped bring the character to life.
Filoni speculated on George Lucas' original idea for the character that became Bane:
Something you notice about George Lucas after a while is that he'll mention a name like 'Mace Windu' in a [1973] version of Star Wars, and then it pops up in 1999.
So, this, I guess might have been an idea George had for the character
Cad Bane way back when,
and now finally he's getting around to bringing him to the screen in The Clone Wars.

==
Promotion and reception ==
Cad Bane has been featured in two Hasbro toys concerning himself, his blaster and his ship respectively, as well as one involving him merged with his ship in a crossover for Transformers.
Both Cad Bane and his speeder were included as part of the Lego Star Wars toy line.
Cad Bane also appears as a playable character in two prominent Star Wars mobile games, both available for iOS and Android, Star Wars: Galaxy of Heroes and Star Wars: Force Arena.
In 2009, UGO Networks ran a feature on Cad Bane, noting his cool looks and calling him "quintessentially cold, cruel and calculating".
IGN listed him as the 31st top Star Wars character, praising his first impression and saying his creators succeeded in introducing "an inarguably cool and effective villain".
IGN also noted he "continued to be an excellent foil" to the main protagonists in his later appearances.
IGN's Eric Goldman said that Bane was a successful attempt at creating a new ongoing villain, and later called him a "very cool and effective new villain".
Goldman also called Bane's introduction and his torture of Bolla Ropal (a Jedi) two of The Clone Wars's darkest moments, adding that Bane lived up to the hype that surrounded him in his introduction.
Christian Bauvelt, writing for Entertainment Weekly's PopWatch, said that one of the three top reasons the "Evil Plans" episode worked for him was because Cad Bane appeared in it, and noted Bane's similarities to Angel Eyes from The Good, the Bad and the Ugly.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Cad Bane in the StarWars.com
Databank
Cad Bane on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Star Wars:
Poe Dameron is a Star Wars comic book series which centers on Poe Dameron, the Resistance X-wing fighter pilot introduced in the 2015 film Star Wars: The Force Awakens.
The series is written by Charles Soule and was first illustrated by Phil Noto, and later Angel Unzueta.
It is set immediately before The Force Awakens.

Published by Marvel Comics, Poe Dameron debuted on April 6, 2016.
In June 2018, Marvel announced that the series would end on September 26, 2018 with issue #31.

==
Plot ==
Resistance General Leia Organa tasks
her star pilot Poe Dameron to find Lor San Tekka—an explorer who may know where the last Jedi Luke Skywalker is hiding—before the First Order does.
Accompanying Poe and his astromech droid BB-8 are pilots Snap Wexley, Karé Kun, L'ulo L'ampar, and Jessika Pava, collectively known as Black Squadron.
Also on Tekka's trail is the menacing Agent Terex, an officer in the First Order Security Bureau who soon becomes Poe's nemesis.

==
Characters and development ==
The look of titular character Poe Dameron is patterned on Oscar Isaac, who portrayed Poe in The Force Awakens.
He and his droid BB-8 are joined in their missions by X-wing pilots Snap Wexley, a character played by Greg Grunberg in the film and resembling the actor in the comic, and Jess Pava, also from The Force Awakens, where she is played by Jessica Henwick.
The series also includes cameos by Leia, appearing in Carrie Fisher's likeness as in the film, and stormtrooper commander Captain Phasma (Gwendoline Christie).
New characters include Resistance pilots Karé Kun and L'ulo L'ampar, as well as X-wing tech Oddy Muva.
Poe Dameron also introduces a new villain, Agent Terex of the First Order Security Bureau, a cocky ex-stormtrooper whom series creator Charles Soule describes as "fresh and cool".
Soule said of Terex in February 2016, "He's a scary guy, a little older, which I think gives him a cool gravitas in much the same way Peter Cushing delivered as Grand Moff Tarkin in A New Hope.
His approach to conflicts is very interesting, and he can be a charmer.
I think of him almost like an evil Lando.
"Poe
Dameron is set prior to the events
The Force Awakens, leading up to the opening of the film when Poe finds Tekka on the planet Jakku.
Soule explained that at this time, "The New Republic and the First Order are in a position of detente, and while there have been a few small skirmishes between the Resistance and the First Order, it's very much a sort of cold war."
He compared the series to a Mission: Impossible film starring Poe, and noted that "the Star Wars galaxy is a dangerous place, and the First Order isn't the only opponent Poe will face".
Soule later elaborated:

I think of it like a bunch of different genre movies, stacked up one after the other.
I've been doing this for a while, actually
—Lando was a heist movie, and Obi-Wan & Anakin is a post-apocalyptic steampunk western.
Poe will be the same, with each arc feeling a bit different.
The first story is straight-up weird, '70s sci-fi, but there's plenty more to come—a prison story, an espionage tale—lots of great stuff.

Soule said that the series would take advantage of the fact that the Star Wars fictional universe "is really flexible as far as what it can include ... there doesn't seem to be many limits on what you might find in the weirder corners of space."
Artist Phil Noto said that, while "trying to take some visual cues from the movies and apply them to the different environments in the book", he hopes to establish the comic's new locations "as something new and unique while having that traditional Star Wars feel to them".
Soule and Noto tried to capture Isaac's personality and likeness "so people feel like it's really Poe from the film," with Noto adding that "I think Oscar did a great job with the humor and heroism of the character."
Soule also writes dialogue for BB-8 in English, which Noto uses when drawing.
It is then "translated" by assistant editor Heather Antos into droid sounds the team calls "bleeps and bloops", which are spelled out in the panels by letterer Joe Caramagna.
==
Publication ==
Charles Soule was contracted to write Poe Dameron before The Force Awakens  was released in December 2015, and he began working on it after seeing the film.
The series was announced in January 2016, to be written by Soule and illustrated by Phil Noto.
With Brian Truitt of USA Today calling Poe one of the "breakout characters" of the film, Soule said, "to see people reacting to him so strongly now just feels like we're hopefully in a great position".
Noto said, "I've seen people on Twitter and Instagram looking for Poe Dameron in the comics.
Now the pressure's on us to deliver.
"
The first issue was released on April 6, 2016.The first issue contains a "Bill Watterson-esque" backup story called "SaBBotage" from writer/artist Chris Eliopoulos and colorist Jordie Bellaire which features BB-8 playing matchmaker.
Angel Unzueta took over as the series' the regular artist in issue #14, after previously working on issue #7.In June 2018
, Marvel announced that the series will end on September 26, 2018 with issue #31, days before the launch of the animated series Star Wars Resistance.

== Reception ==
Jesse Schedeen of IGN wrote, "Soule captures all of Oscar Isaac's roguish charm in his depiction of Poe".
Alex Brown of Tor.com agreed, noting "Soule has perfectly captured Oscar Isaac"s puppy dog playfulness".
Jim Johnson of Comic Book Resources, writing that "Poe's characterization is played safely within the context established in the movie, without any real surprises or attempts to advance his character," called the first issue "a conservative but well-executed take on a fan-favorite character".
While acknowledging the creative limits presumably set by Lucasfilm on spin-off works, Schedeen criticized the first issue for "sticking too close to the confines of The Force Awakens".
He also wrote that "Noto's clean, crisp art impresses, even if his style is a bit disappointingly straightforward compared to past works."
Brown suggested that the artist's work "handily reproduces the cast in fine detail, leaning heavier on realism than most comic books".

==
In other media ==
Agent Terex, a character who exclusively appeared in this series, appeared in an update for the mobile game
Star Wars:
Force Arena, available for iOS and Android on December 10, 2017, which introduced more content from the Star Wars sequel trilogy.

He is a summonable unique assistant for any Dark Side squad led by Captain Phasma.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Star Wars: Poe Dameron on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Wicket Wystri Warrick is a fictional character from the Star Wars franchise, first introduced and portrayed by Warwick Davis in the 1983 film Return of the Jedi.
Warrick appeared in two non-canonical made-for-television movies, an animated series, and promotional media for Star Wars from 1983 to 1986.
Davis reprised the role in the 2019 theatrical film The Rise of Skywalker, appearing in a brief cameo.
Wicket is a diminutive teddy bear-like creature known as an Ewok, living on the forest moon of Endor and eventually participating in the Battle of Endor as an ally of the Rebel Alliance.

==
Character ==


===
Development ===
In concluding his original Star Wars trilogy, George Lucas had foreseen the decisive battle in the Galactic Civil War taking place between the Wookiees and the Empire; however, he considered Chewbacca too skilled with technology, and wanted a more primitive species than the Wookiees to defeat the Empire.
A few different creatures, such as the stilt-legged Yuzzums, were proposed before the diminutive bear-like design of the Ewoks was settled on.
Although neither the word Ewok nor any of the Ewok names are actually mentioned in Return of the Jedi, a handful of Ewoks were named by the production, mentioned in the novelization, and first appeared in the Kenner action figure line based on the movie.

The main focal point of this new Ewok species was to be Wicket Wystri Warrick, a small young male scout and warrior.
Generally considered to be the most well known of the Ewoks, Wicket would be given the lead role in almost all subsequent Ewok related media released after Return of the Jedi.
===
Casting ===
Wicket was portrayed by Warwick Davis in 1983's Return of the Jedi.
The then 11-year-old actor came to be involved in the film after his grandmother heard a radio ad calling for short actors.
Davis began work on the film in January 1982.
Originally cast as a generic Ewok, Davis caught the eye of George Lucas with aspects of his performance, such as his ability to stick his tongue through his Ewok mask and the inquisitive tilting of his head (which was inspired by Davis' dog).
Kenny Baker was originally set to take the role of Wicket; however, Baker fell ill with food poisoning, and Davis was called in as a replacement.

==
Appearances ==


===
Film ===
The character made his first appearance in the 1983 film Return of the Jedi.
Wicket was the first Ewok to appear on screen, encountering Princess Leia Organa after she survived her speeder bike chase, bringing her to his tree-top Ewok village, and making contact with the Rebel Alliance during the Battle of Endor.
Wicket was also featured in the later village scenes, as well as helping the Alliance during the Battle of Endor itself, attacking Imperial stormtroopers with his slingshot.

At the end of The Rise of Skywalker, Wicket makes a brief appearance alongside Pommet Warrick, his son, celebrating the defeat of the First Order.
Warwick Davis reprised his character, alongside his son Harrison Davis, who played Pommet.

===
Forces of Destiny ===
Wicket appears in the micro-series Star Wars Forces of Destiny.

===
Legends ===
In April 2014 (with the sequel film The Force Awakens in production), Lucasfilm separated the Star Wars Expanded Universe (rebranded as Star Wars Legends) from official Star Wars canon.

====
Television films ====
Wicket was featured in the 1984 TV film The Ewok Adventure (set before Return of the Jedi), theatrically released as Caravan of Courage: An Ewok Adventure.
In the film, he accompanies stranded brother and sister Mace and Cindel Towani as he and the Ewoks help find and rescue the children's missing parents from the giant Gorax.
Wicket is revealed to be the son of Deej and Shodu, and has two older brothers, Weechee and Widdle.
Wicket would return the following year in a sequel, Ewoks: The Battle for Endor.
In this film, Wicket helps Cindel and new allies Noa (Wilfred Brimley) and Teek defeat King Terak and his Sanyassan Marauders.
This film strengthened the bonds between Wicket and Cindel, with Wicket rescuing his family and learning to speak some Galactic Basic (which he seems to have forgotten by the time of Return of the Jedi).
====
Ewoks ====
Wicket was the main character in the animated series Ewoks, which ran for two seasons in 1985 and 1986, consisting of 35 episodes.
This children's cartoon series, set in the fictional Bright Tree Village, mostly featured the antics of Wicket and his family (in line with the TV movies).
Wicket's friends Kneesaa and Latara were introduced, and further backstories for existing Ewok characters Teebo, Paploo, Chief Chirpa, and Logray were established.
The series would also often showcase Wicket and the Ewoks' battles with the Duloks, Morag the witch, and other creatures on the moon of Endor.

==
Related works and merchandising ==
In the 1980s, Wicket was heavily featured in several promotional items, toys, children's books, read-along records and cassettes and comic books.

== Reception ==
Wicket and the Ewoks are a controversial addition to Return of the Jedi and the Star Wars Universe in general, and are seen by some to be the weakest link of the original trilogy.
According to Tami Katzoff of MTV News, "a prevailing theory among Ewok-haters is that the creatures were originally conceived as a sure way to appeal to small children and sell plush toys to their parents.
"
The Ewoks have some defenders, and have proven to be very popular with children from their introduction in the 1980s to the present day.
==
References ==


==
External links ==
Wicket W. Warrick on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Wicket W. Warrick in the StarWars.com Databank
Wicket W. Warrick on IMDb
Jar Jar Binks is a fictional character from the Star Wars saga created by George Lucas.
A major character in Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace, he also has a smaller role in Episode II:
Attack of the Clones, and a one-line cameo in Episode III: Revenge of the Sith, as well as a role in the television series Star Wars:
The Clone Wars.
The first fully computer-generated supporting character in a live-action film, he has been portrayed by Ahmed Best in most of his appearances.

Jar Jar's primary role in Episode
I was to provide comic relief for the audience.
He was met with overwhelming dislike from both critics and audiences, and is recognized as one of the most hated characters in Star Wars and the history of film in general, with some critics even considering him a racist caricature.
However, part of this reception changed in 2015 after a popular fan theory, later partially validated by Best, suggested Jar Jar had been actually written as a manipulative villain in The Phantom Menace before being discarded in the next films.

==
Conception ==
George Lucas was inspired to develop Jar Jar based on the Disney character Goofy.
Singer Michael Jackson wanted to play the role, but wished to portray the character using prosthetics while Lucas wanted him to be all CGI.
Ahmed Best was cast based on his work in the production of Stomp, as Lucas wanted someone athletic for the role.
During his audition he performed several martial arts moves and flips, which according to Best was a contrast to how Lucas pictured the character, more in line with comedic silent actors such as Buster Keaton.
After Lucas walked out of the audition, Best felt he had failed it.
Terryl Whitlatch created the final designs for the "cowardly and insecure" character.
Best wore a prosthetic costume to portray Jar Jar, which cost about $100,000 and served as a reference for the actors to interact with, animators to base the performance on, and digital artists to match the lighting.
He was the first computer-generated supporting character in a live-action film, although in a small number of shots (such as those only showing the character's hands or feet), the costume was not replaced with CGI.

==
Appearances ==


===
Films ===


====
The Phantom Menace ====
Jar
Jar Binks first appears in Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace as a bumbling, foolish Gungan from the planet Naboo who is banished by his tribe as punishment for his clumsiness.
He is nearly killed by a Trade Federation transport, only to be saved at the last minute by
Jedi Master Qui-Gon Jinn (Liam Neeson).
Qui-Gon and his padawan, Obi-Wan Kenobi (Ewan McGregor), persuade Jar Jar's tribe to release him to their custody as a guide.
He later goes with the Jedi and Padmé Amidala (Natalie Portman) to the planet Tatooine, where he meets and befriends nine-year-old slave Anakin Skywalker (Jake Lloyd).

Jar Jar later appears in the film's climactic battle scene, where he leads his fellow Gungans, as a general in the Gungan army, in defeating the Trade Federation.
After the battle, he appears at the funeral of Qui-Gon Jinn and in the ending parade with his fellow Gungans.

====
Attack of the Clones ====
Jar Jar's role in Attack of the Clones is much smaller, but his actions are significant.
Ten years after helping to save his planet, he is a delegate to the Galactic Senate and as such, plays a role in bringing his old friends, Obi-Wan and Anakin (Hayden Christensen) back to Coruscant, where he greets them with enthusiasm.
Later, on the behalf of the Naboo, he gives a speech to the assembled Senate in favor of granting Chancellor Palpatine (Ian McDiarmid) vast emergency powers.

====
Revenge of the Sith ====
Jar Jar appears in only a few scenes in Revenge of the Sith, and has no dialogue (besides a brief "'scuse me" at one point).
He was originally given some dialogue in the beginning, but this was cut.
Another cut scene would have shown Palpatine mocking Jar Jar for putting him in power before crowning himself emperor.
He is most prominently featured in Padmé Amidala's funeral procession at the end of the film, marching sadly behind her coffin alongside Boss Nass.
===
The Clone Wars television series ===
Jar Jar Binks is a supporting character in the animated series Star Wars:
The Clone Wars, once again voiced by Best, although Phil LaMarr voiced the character in three season
one episodes under the pseudonym BJ Hughes.
In this series, he is a Senate representative who sometimes accompanies the main characters—Anakin, Obi-Wan, Padmé, and Anakin's padawan Ahsoka Tano—on their adventures.
He and Jedi Master Mace Windu are the two main characters of the two-part episode "The Disappeared" in which they had to search for missing elders and rescue a queen, who was Jar Jar's past love interest.

====
List of appearances in series ====
Season 1 episode 8 "
Bombad Jedi"
Season 1 episode 11
"Dooku Captured"
Season 1 episode 12 "The Gungan General"
Season 1 episode 17
"Blue Shadow Virus"
Season 1 episode 18 "Mystery of a Thousand Moons"
Season 2 episode 4
"Senate Spy"
Season 3 episode 3 "Supply Lines"
Season 4 episode 2 "Gungan Attack"
Season 4 episode 3 "Prisoners"
Season 4 episode 4 "
Shadow Warrior"
Season 4 episode 15 "Deception"
Season 6 episode 8 "
The Disappeared, Part I"
Season 6 episode 9 "
The Disappeared, Part II"


===
Literature ===


====
Aftermath:
Empire's End ====
Chuck Wendig's 2017 novel Star Wars:
Aftermath: Empire's End, set after the events of Return of the Jedi, finds Binks as a street performer who entertains refugee children but is loathed by adults who blame him for his part in the rise of the Empire.
Chris Taylor of Mashable wrote that the situation reflects real life in that adults disliked Jar Jar in the prequel films, but children were entertained by him.
In an interview, director J.J. Abrams suggested that Jar Jar's death might be referenced in Star Wars:
The Force Awakens, but this did not happen.

====
Legends ====
With the 2012 acquisition of Lucasfilm by The Walt Disney Company, most of the licensed Star Wars novels and comics produced since the originating 1977 film Star Wars were rebranded as Star Wars Legends and declared non-canon to the franchise in April 2014.In the game
Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed, Jar Jar is shown to have been frozen in carbonite by Darth Vader and kept in the Sith's lair.

===
Other appearances ===
Binks is a Lego mini-figure in the Lego Star Wars video games, and appears as an Angry Bird with a hook move called "Jar Jar Wings" in Angry Birds Star Wars II.
Ahmed Best was signed on to portray Binks in the show Star Wars Detours.

== Reception ==
Even before the release of The Phantom Menace, Jar Jar Binks became the subject of a great deal of media and popular attention.
After the film's release, Binks became symbolic of what many reviewers such as Brent Staples (The New York Times), David Edelstein (Slate), and Eric Harrison (Los Angeles Times) considered to be creative flaws of the film.
The character was widely rejected and often ridiculed by people who felt that Jar Jar was included in the film solely to appeal to children.
Bruce Handy of Vanity Fair wrote that "Jar Jar has come to symbolize what many fans see as the faults of the prequel trilogy: characters no one much cares about; a sense of humor geared toward the youngest conceivable audience members; an over-reliance on computer graphics; and story lines devoted to the kinds of convoluted political machinations which wouldn’t have been out of place in adaptations of I, Claudius or The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich, but which fit less snugly in films with characters like Jar Jar Binks."
One fan, Mike J. Nichols, created and distributed, free of charge, a modified version of the film, entitled The Phantom Edit, which cut out several scenes featuring what Nichols dubbed 'Jar Jar antics.'
The character was also lampooned on an episode of the television show South Park entitled "Jakovasaurs", in The Fairly OddParents
(Episode: "Abra-Catastrophe!"),
The Simpsons
(Episode: "Co-Dependent's Day"), as well as the parody Star Wars episodes of Robot Chicken, in which Best reprised the role in voice-over form.
Along with film critics, many have also accused the film's creators of excessive commercialization directed at young children (a criticism first leveled with the introduction of the Ewoks in Return of the Jedi).
Star Wars creator George Lucas stated that he feels there is a section of the fanbase who get upset with aspects of Star Wars because "the movies are for children
but they don't want to admit that...
There is a small group of fans that do not like comic sidekicks.
They want the films to be tough like The Terminator, and they get very upset and opinionated about anything that has anything to do with being childlike.
"In
July 2018, Best said that the widespread criticism of his character had led to him considering suicide.
In April 2019, during the annual Star Wars Celebration event ahead of the 20th anniversary panel for The Phantom Menace, George Lucas named Jar Jar as his favorite Star Wars character.
===
Allegations of racial caricature ===
Joe Morgenstern of The Wall Street Journal described the character as a "Rastafarian Stepin Fetchit on platform hoofs, crossed annoyingly with Butterfly McQueen."
Patricia J. Williams suggested that many aspects of Jar Jar's character are highly reminiscent of the archetypes portrayed in blackface minstrelsy, while others have suggested the character is a "laid-back clown character" representing a black Caribbean stereotype.
George Lucas has denied any racist implications.
Ahmed Best also rejected the allegations, saying that "Jar Jar has nothing to do with the Caribbean".
===
Speculations of villainy ===
In late October 2015, a Reddit user by the name of "Lumpawarroo" published a detailed theory speculating that Binks was originally written as a major antagonist of the series, a manipulative, prominent collaborator of Palpatine, before being written off from his major villain's role due to the character's negative reception.
This theory was related to an earlier interview with actor Ahmed Best in /r
/
IAmA, where he claimed that Jar Jar had been displaced from the story's main focus due to the backlash, implying at the same time that the hate received by the character was not entirely unintentional.
The post quickly became popular and received significant media coverage internationally by independent bloggers and major news outlets like The Guardian, The Washington Post, and The New York Times, which included analysis of his actions in The Phantom Menace and gave him the nickname of "Darth Jar Jar".
Journalist Andrew Street from The Guardian called it a "classic twist", comparing it to Yoda's role in The Empire Strikes Back, while Matt Hickey from Forbes went to the extent of contacting George Lucas about the question, but received no answer.
In response to the speculations, Best tweeted, "I will say this
, it feels really good when the hidden meaning behind the work is seen.
No matter how long it takes," apparently confirming the theory.
Some months later, he expanded upon his tweet in a YouTube interview, stating, "there is a lot about [the theory] that is true
, there are some things about it that are not true...
Could Jar Jar have evolved into that?
I think the answer is yes.
Because of the backlash, and rightfully so, Lucasfilm backed off of Jar Jar a lot, but a lot of the influence that I put into the character mirrored a lot of what was already in the Star Wars universe."
Best concluded only Lucas could unveil the actual role of Binks, yet he also claimed that a deleted scene from Attack of the Clones would have still shown Palpatine darkly confiding his plans about the Empire to Jar Jar.
J. J. Abrams, who directed two installments of the franchise's sequel trilogy after its buyout by Disney, personally approved the theory about the villainous Jar Jar.
He described Lumpawarroo's argumentation as an "unbelievably lengthy analysis, in a very seriously thought-out way, as to why it's obviously true."
==
References ==
Footnotes
Citations


==
External links ==
Jar Jar Binks in the StarWars.com Databank
Jar
Jar Binks quotes from IMDb
Star Wars
Episode
I at IMDb
Ahmed Best at IMDb
Collection of negative Jar Jar comments from major media sources.

Jar Jar Binks on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
General Grievous is a fictional character and a major antagonist in the Star Wars franchise created by George Lucas.
He was introduced as a supporting villain in the 2003 animated series Star Wars:
Clone Wars, voiced by John DiMaggio in the second season and Richard McGonagle in the third season, before making his live-action debut in Star Wars:
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith (2005), where he was created using computer-generated imagery and voiced by Matthew Wood.
Wood reprised his role in the 2008 canonical animated series Star Wars:
The Clone Wars, where Grievous is one of the main antagonists.

Grievous, a brilliant military strategist, served as the Supreme Commander of the Confederacy of Independent Systems' droid armies during the Clone Wars.
While not Force-sensitive, he trained in all lightsaber combat forms under Count Dooku to rival the Jedi of the Galactic Republic.
Throughout the Clone Wars, Grievous murdered numerous Jedi and collected their lightsabers as trophies, earning a reputation as the most feared Jedi hunter in the galaxy of his era.
He developed a rivalry with Jedi Master Obi-Wan Kenobi, with whom he clashed numerous times during the war, and who eventually killed Grievous after he assumed command of the Separatist Alliance following Dooku's death in Revenge of the Sith.

Aside from the films and animated series, the character appears in various canon and non-canon Star Wars media, such as books, comics, and video games, many of which explore his backstory.
Within Star Wars Legends material, Grievous was born Qymaen jai Sheelal and was a Kaleesh warlord who developed a personal vendetta against the Republic and the Jedi.
After suffering near-fatal injuries in a ship crash, he was rescued by Count Dooku (who was secretly responsible for the crash) and rebuilt as a cyborg.
The character's backstory was retconned in The Clone Wars animated series, in which it is implied that Grievous willingly replaced parts of his body with cybernetic augmentations, in an effort to "upgrade" himself.
However, several elements of Grievous's backstory from Legends were later reintroduced in the current Star Wars canon through various books.

Since his introduction, Grievous has become a widely recognized figure in popular culture, and one of the most popular Star Wars characters of all time, gaining a cult status.

==
Concept and creation ==
General Grievous was developed for Revenge of the Sith as a powerful new villain on the side of the Separatists.
The initial instructions that director George Lucas gave the Art Department were very open-ended: "a droid general".
From that vague direction, the artists developed a lot of explorations, some purely mechanical, some not, for Grievous's look.
He was also created as a villain foreshadowing Anakin Skywalker's transformation into Darth Vader: the heavy breathing, the cyborg body and his seduction into an evil faction.

The initial design sketch for Grievous was refined and made into a 1-foot (30 cm)-tall maquette sculpture.
That was further refined when it was made into a realistic computer-generated model by Industrial Light & Magic.
At the time, this was one of the most complicated models ever created by ILM, with many parts of differing physical qualities.
Grievous is completely computer-generated imagery in the movie.
On set, Duncan Young read the lines off-screen while Kyle Rowling wore a bluescreen or a greenscreen suit to act out the fights with Obi-Wan Kenobi.

Also notable are the numerous contradictions between the expanded universe and both TV series.
Grievous is depicted as having four fingers per arm in the Star Wars:
The Clone Wars series whereas Star Wars: Clone Wars has the general depicted as having five.
Star Wars: Revenge of the Sith and most other comics depicted him as having six fingers per arm.
The original Clone Wars incarnation was fast, acrobatic and powerful but not as often in command when compared to the more recent The Clone Wars incarnation of the character.
Furthermore, his asthmatic cough and hunchbacked stance are already present, despite having not gained them prior to his confrontation with Mace Windu.
The general's back story has also been changed: supervising director Dave Filoni stated that Grievous opted for surgery in order to gain abilities that would allow him to rival a Jedi.
This is reinforced by season one's tenth episode "Lair of Grievous" which suggested the general's transformation into a cyborg was a gradual process.

Comparisons have been drawn between the character's appearance and Jacob Epstein's sculpture Rock Drill.
===
Portrayal ===
Sound editor Matthew Wood submitted a voice audition for the character as Alan Smithee.
Lucas liked this audition the most, and since he had bronchitis at the time, he instructed Wood to give the character an asthmatic cough.
This was intended to emphasize the character's organic nature as well as the flaws of having cyborg prosthetics.
Some of the audio effects for the coughing in Revenge of the Sith were taken from Lucas while he had bronchitis.
Grievous appeared in the micro-series Star Wars:
Clone Wars before many of his personality traits had been finalized.
To reconcile the differences between the two presentations, Mace Windu uses the Force to crush Grievous's chest panel towards the end of the show's third season.
However, Grievous has the cough for the entirety of his appearance in Star Wars:
The Clone Wars, making his micro-series backstory non-canon.

General Grievous has been voiced by four actors.
For the Season Two finale of the Clone Wars animated micro-series, the character was voiced by John DiMaggio, who gave him a tinny voice—not knowing what the character would sound like in Revenge of the Sith.
Richard McGonagle voiced the character for Clone Wars Season Three.
The character was voiced by Matthew Wood in the feature film Revenge of the Sith, the animated series The Clone Wars, and most video game appearances.
David W. Collins voiced the character (albeit uncredited) in Star Wars Battlefront: Renegade Squadron and Battlefront: Elite Squadron.

Gary Oldman (a friend of producer Rick McCallum) agreed to submit a voice audition but his involvement never went beyond that.
Several months later, actor John Rhys-Davies was widely reported to be the character's voice but this was revealed to be a prank.
DiMaggio was considered for the role for Grievous after he had previously voiced him in the 2003 Clone Wars animated series, but was later dropped.

==
Appearances ==


===
Film ===


====
Revenge of the Sith ====
In Star Wars: Episode III – Revenge of the Sith, General Grievous holds Supreme Chancellor Palpatine hostage aboard his flagship, the Invisible Hand.
The Jedi Obi-Wan Kenobi and Anakin Skywalker launch a rescue operation, and the latter kills Separatist leader Count Dooku.
Grievous traps
the fleeing Jedi and the Chancellor in a ray shield, and
has them brought along with R2-D2 to the ship's bridge.
He confiscates Obi-Wan and Anakin's lightsabers, cackling that he will add them to his vast collection.
When R2-D2 creates a distraction, Obi-Wan and Anakin use the Force to retrieve their lightsabers and free themselves.
A short battle ensues with the Jedi overcoming Grievous's MagnaGuards and Battle droids before turning their attention to the General himself.
Grievous escapes by using the electrostaff of a fallen MagnaGuard to shatter the bridge's glass and create a vacuum that pulls everything out towards space.
He subsequently fires a grappling hook to secure himself to the ship and scales its exterior en route to an escape pod.
Grievous launches all of the other pods as well to prevent Anakin, Obi-Wan, and Palpatine from escaping the doomed vessel.
However, Anakin manages to take control of the ship and crash land it safely.

Now taking Dooku's place as both the political and military leader of the Separatists, Grievous heads to the planet of Utapau, where the council members of the Confederacy of Independent Systems are hiding; the Separatists have taken the residents of Utapau hostage.
He receives a message from Dooku's master Darth Sidious – who, unbeknownst to Grievous, is Palpatine's Sith alter ego – telling him to move the council members to the volcanic planet Mustafar.
Sidious also tells Grievous that the war will soon come to an end and when Grievous objects about the loss of Dooku, Sidious replied that his death was a necessary loss and that he'll soon have a new apprentice who is "far younger and more powerful".

With Dooku dead, the hunt for Grievous becomes a priority for the Republic, and would also be a litmus test into whether Palpatine would give up his executive war powers granted to him by the Galactic Senate for the war.
Obi-Wan Kenobi later tracks Grievous to Utapau.
When Obi-Wan destroys his MagnaGuards, Grievous duels the Jedi in single combat, splitting each of his mechanical arms in half to simultaneously use four lightsabers.
The Republic's clone troopers then arrive to engage Grievous's Droid Army.
Obi-Wan disarms Grievous with the Force and pursues him when the general retreats on his wheelbike, fleeing to the hangar where his starfighter is located.
The two engage in hand-to-hand combat, where Obi-Wan manages to rip open Grievous's chest plates, revealing the parts where his organs are located.
Enraged, Grievous throws Obi-Wan off the platform, easily overpowering him.
Using the Force, Obi-Wan manipulates his position and catches hold of his edge.
As Grievous charges at him with his electrostaff, Obi-Wan uses the Force to summon the general's blaster.
Before Grievous can deliver the final blow, Obi-Wan shoots him in his organs underneath his exoskeleton, which then catches fire, killing the cyborg general.

===
Television series ===


====
The Clone Wars ====
Grievous is one of the main antagonists of the 2008 computer-animated series Star Wars: The Clone Wars.
In the first season, he is shown to be commanding the Separatist warship Malevolence armed with a pair of heavy ion cannons.
He also clashes with Obi-Wan Kenobi aboard the Malevolence for the first time when he chases him aboard the warship's railway system.
During the ensuing lightsaber duel, Grievous nearly gets the better of Obi-Wan, but the Jedi Master escapes at the last moment.
Meanwhile, Anakin secretly sabotages the Malevolence's navigation computer, sending it crashing into a nearby moon.
However, Grievous escapes on his starfighter and continues his campaign against the Republic.
A few episodes later, Grievous discovers Anakin and Padawan Ahsoka Tano infiltrating his secret listening post and seeks out to search for them.
He then engages Ahsoka and her squad of clone troopers, defeating all the troopers and then engaging in a cat and mouse game with the Padawan.
However, Anakin and Ahsoka still manage to destroy his listening post.
Aware of Grievous's recent string of failures, Count Dooku arranges a test for his cyborg henchman – in the form of Jedi Master Kit Fisto and Jedi Knight Nahdar Vebb.
In Grievous's personal castle on the third moon of Vassek, the two Jedi and a squad of clone troopers ambush Grievous and cut off his legs.
Once repaired, Grievous duels and kills Vebb.
On the outskirts of Grievous's castle, the general climbs up from the ledge and unleashes four lightsabers on Fisto.
Using the fog to his advantage, Fisto successfully cuts off one of Grievous's hands and reclaims Vebb's lightsaber.
Armed with two lightsabers, Fisto gains the upper hand over Grievous to which the general calls in his Magnaguards and Fisto flees.
Grievous reports to Dooku, who says that there is room for improvement.

During the second season, Grievous boards a Republic Cruiser with Jedi Master Eeth Koth on board.
Grievous duels Koth and takes him prisoner.
Obi-Wan, Anakin and Jedi Master Adi Gallia attempt to rescue Koth and capture Grievous, resulting in a confrontation between Obi-Wan and Grievous over the planet Saleucami, which Grievous loses.
Though the Jedi succeed in rescuing Koth, Grievous, helped by his droids, escapes once again.

In the third season, Grievous, Dark Jedi Asajj Ventress and their armies attack the clone factories on the planet Kamino.
During the battle, Grievous clashes with Obi-Wan again.
However, their duel ends in stalemate and Grievous flees the planet with Ventress.
Later on, Grievous commands a sabotage mission using infiltrator droids on the Galactic Senate, resulting in a deregulation of the banks.

During the fourth season, Grievous suffers a humiliating defeat when he attempts to invade Naboo.
Jar Jar Binks distracts Grievous in a series of negotiations long enough for the Gungan army to shut down Grievous's invasion force.
As Grievous pursues Jar Jar, he slaughters many Gungan soldiers.
At that moment, General Tarpals intervenes and engages Grievous in a duel.
Although he is mortally wounded by the cyborg, Tarpals impales Grievous through his chest which allows the Gungan Army to bombard the wounded general with energized projectiles and capture him.
However, he is freed in a prisoner exchange with Anakin between Dooku and Padmé Amidala.
Later, Grievous attacks Gallia's ship, engaging her in a lightsaber duel down a narrow hallway.
The duel ends when Grievous kicks Gallia in the chest, sending her flying across the hallway.
Grievous then captures Gallia.
Shortly after, Gallia escapes Grievous's custody when a strike force led by Jedi Master Plo Koon boards his ship and frees the Jedi Master, prompting Grievous to flee once again.
Grievous is later sent to the planet
Dathomir under Dooku's orders to exterminate the Nightsisters.
Immediately upon landing on the planet's surface, the general begins his rampage and his droid army turns Dathomir into a battlefield.
However, Ventress turns the tide of the battle and fights her way to the general's shuttle where the cyborg emerges to confront her personally.
As they duel, Grievous grows overconfident and begins to toy with Ventress until she surprises him by chopping off one of his arms and knocking him to the ground.
Grievous then orders his troops to fire on Ventress, wounding her.
As Grievous prepares to deliver the death blow to his longtime rival, he is attacked by Nightsister zombies and is forced to fight them off while Ventress flees.
Under new orders from Dooku, Grievous turns his attention to Nightsister leader Mother Talzin and slaughters his way to her fortress where she narrowly escapes from the general's grasp by teleporting away.
Grievous is later seen on Serenno listening to Dooku's fears about Savage Opress.

In the fifth season's premiere episode, Grievous is mentioned by Hondo Ohnaka as having defeated Obi-Wan and won the battle for the system that Florrum is in.
This battle is shown in the episode "Bound for Rescue" where Grievous attacks Obi-Wan's ship; the General slaughters a squadron of clones and duels Obi-Wan.
Obi-Wan is no match for Grievous and is subsequently defeated, forcing him to abandon his ship.
Later, Grievous goes to Florrum personally and announces that the system is under his control now, and that Dooku is having him punish Hondo for holding him for ransom.
The droids destroy Hondo's stronghold and his belongings, and hold him prisoner, but Hondo is rescued when Ahsoka and a group of younglings free him and retreat off the planet.
Grievous pursues them and fights Ahsoka.
Although she has grown stronger since their last battle, Grievous still proves to be more than a match for her.
The duel ends when Hondo picks up Ahsoka in the Slave I and takes off, leaving Grievous to stew in his anger.
Grievous is mentioned in the episode "Secret Weapons", where a team of Republic droids led by Colonel Gascon is tasked with retrieving a module that will decode a transmission which Grievous made about an important Separatist attack.

Grievous was to undergo a design change in the seventh season to look more like his design in Revenge of the Sith.
Though the series was cancelled before this could happen, the unfinished animations of the Crystal Crisis arc showed this design.
In this arc, Grievous is sent by Dooku to purchase a giant kyber crystal on Utapau, and while Grievous at first obtains the crystal, it is lost when Anakin and Obi-Wan destroy it by overloading its power.
Grievous makes a brief appearance in the opening sequence of "Old Friends Not Forgotten", the first episode of the Siege of Mandalore story-arc from the seventh and final season.
As the arc takes place during the events of Revenge of the Sith, Grievous has a different design, reminiscent of his appearance in the film, and is commanding his fleet in an attack on Coruscant with the goal of capturing Chancellor Palpatine.
Grievous is mentioned in the following two episodes,
"The Phantom Apprentice" and "Shattered", when Obi-Wan states that he is going to Utapau to hunt him down, and later when Ki-Adi Mundi mentions during a meeting with the Jedi Council that Grievous has been killed (similarly to a scene from Revenge of the Sith).
===
Literature ===
Grievous appears as a major character in the four-part comic series Son of Dathomir, an unproduced story arc intended for the sixth season of The Clone Wars.
In the comic, Dooku sends Grievous to hunt down the rogue Sith Lord Darth Maul, who has become a significant threat to Sidious' plans.
Grievous is ordered to only wound Maul's forces, but not kill him; this is in order to draw out Mother Talzin, who is later revealed to be Maul's mother.
Though he thinks it foolish to keep Maul alive, Grievous does as he is told.
He takes a huge army of droids to Zanbar and attacks Maul's army of Death Watch warriors.
Despite heavy casualties, Grievous's droids ultimately win the battle.
During the battle, Grievous briefly fights Maul and wins, forcing him to flee.
Later, Grievous and Dooku are lured into a trap by Maul and his minions, and are taken prisoner in order to draw out Sidious.
However, Grievous soon escapes and rejoins Sidious, who orders Grievous to attack Dathomir again, where Maul and Talzin are planning using Dooku as a sacrifice to restore Talzin to full strength.
Sidious fights Talzin while Grievous duels Maul again.
Maul eventually overpowers Grievous and Force-pushes him through a wall.
Grievous quickly reappears, however, and after Sidious and Dooku have subdued Talzin (who has thrown Maul out of the battle to save his life),
Grievous stabs her through the chest with his lightsabers, killing her.

===
Legends ===
Grievous is featured extensively in prequel-era Expanded Universe material.
In April 2014, most of the licensed Star Wars novels and comics produced since the originating 1977 film were rebranded by Lucasfilm as Star Wars Legends and declared non-canon to the franchise.

====
Clone Wars ====
In the 2003 Star Wars: Clone Wars animated series, which marked the character's first ever appearance, General Grievous makes his first public appearance when he attacks several Jedi on Hypori.
After killing Master Daakman Barrek, Grievous and his droids surround Tarr Seirr, Sha'a Gi, Aayla Secura, K'Kruhk, Ki-Adi-Mundi and Shaak Ti.
After stating he would grant the Jedi a "warrior's death", Grievous battles the six Jedi all by himself, killing Seirr and Gi and injuring Secura and Ti.
K'Kruhk is also mortally wounded, and falls into a state of hibernation after Grievous strikes him down.
He manages to possess three lightsabers (one in each hand and the third using his left foot) to fight Mundi after all the other Jedi have been dispatched.
As they fight, lightsabers blazing, Clone ARC Troopers led by Captain Fordo arrive to save the surviving Jedi.
Grievous retreats, but secures his victory over the Jedi as he collects the lightsabers of the Jedi he has killed.

Three years later, Grievous searches for Chancellor Palpatine on Coruscant, attempting to capture him while he is defended by a trio of Jedi consisting of Shaak Ti, Roron Corobb and Foul Moudama.
Ti orders
Corobb and Moudama take Palpatine to a secret bunker while she holds Grievous off.
However, Grievous's Magnaguards distract Ti while Grievous reaches the hardened bunker, kills Corobb and Moudama, and captures Palpatine.
Ti learns too late that the Magnaguards were but a distraction and heads to the bunker to find her Jedi comrades dead, and Palpatine in Grievous's grasp.
Grievous defeats Ti yet again, takes her lightsaber, and restrains her with electric cables before returning to his shuttle with Palpatine in his custody.
As Grievous is about to escape, Mace Windu confronts him using the Force to crush his chest plates, severely injuring his lungs and leaving him with his distinctive asthmatic cough, though Grievous still escapes, leading to the events of Revenge of the Sith.

====
Literature ====
Grievous made his first appearance in the comics in a short story in Star Wars:
Visionaries called "The Eyes of Revolution".
This story reveals that he was once Kaleesh general Qymaen jai Sheelal, a fierce warrior engaged in a brutal war with the rival planet Huk.
Grievous has had many wives, including the human Gravlyn, and several children.
He boards a shuttle to take him to another battle, unaware that Dooku had planted an explosive device in it.
He is mortally wounded in the resulting crash, and what remains of his body is reconstructed with cybernetic limbs.
Dooku then recruits him into the Separatist Army as his second-in-command, appealing to his hatred of the Republic that ignored his home world's plight.

In the third volume of Clone Wars Adventures, it is revealed that Grievous attains his rank of Supreme Commander by dueling Dooku's underlings Ventress and Durge simultaneously.
On board the Trenchant space station, Dooku orders Ventress and Durge to search for an unknown intruder with the pair unaware of their master's intentions.
Armed with an electrostaff, Grievous appears from behind and electrocutes Durge and subsequently throws him across the hallway through a few trophies.
Ventress jumps onto a chandelier and attempts to search for Grievous, who knocks her down.
Ventress and Durge then confront Grievous face to face, with Ventress unleashing her lightsabers and Durge unleashing his full arsenal.
Grievous is able to knock Ventress away, though Durge then sends the general flying across the room into a wall with a powerful punch to the face.
Enraged, Grievous unleashes his lightsabers, swiftly defeating the pair.
In the wake of the battle, Grievous is made the Supreme Commander of the Confederacy's military.

Grievous starred in his own comic called Star Wars:
General Grievous, in which he fights Jedi Master T'chooka D'oon and his Padawan Flyn.
After Grievous kills D'oon, Kybo returns to the Jedi council with a plan to destroy Grievous once and for all.
When the council rebukes his vengeful plan, Kybo decides to take this matter into own hands with disastrous results.
Grievous also appears in the comics in Star Wars:
Obsession issue number 4, in which he is on the world of Boz Pity, where he kills two Jedi, Master Soon Bayts and Jedi Council member Adi Gallia.
Though Windu injures Grievous, Dooku is able to save the general so he may fight another day.

In the novel Labyrinth of Evil, Grievous plans an invasion of Coruscant alongside Dooku and Sidious.
He first appears in the novel watching his hated subordinate Nute Gunray flee from a pursuant Republic Strike Force.
Grievous reluctantly saves Gunray by destroying the fighters.
Grievous's invasion of the planet
Belderone would also be thwarted by Anakin and Obi-Wan due to a careless mistake on Gunray's part.
Though Gunray resorts to lies, Grievous deduces that he is lying and threatens to kill him.
Later on the bridge of the Invisible Hand, Dooku watches as Grievous spars his elite Magnaguards.
Though Grievous wins the fight, Dooku points out several flaws in the general's technique while realizing he is partly to blame for the general's inadequacies.
Grievous soon launches his invasion on the Republic capital of Coruscant in an attempt to kidnap Supreme Chancellor Palpatine, placing himself on the battlefield once again.
During the invasion, Grievous battles Mace Windu atop a maglev train while personally trying to capture Palpatine.
Though Windu overwhelms Grievous in combat, the cyborg outwits the Jedi Guard and takes Palpatine hostage, setting the stage for Revenge of the Sith.

===
Video games ===
General Grievous appears as a boss in the Revenge of the Sith video game based on the film; he is also a playable character in the game's dueling mode.
Grievous makes a brief appearance in the Legends video game
Star Wars: Republic Commando (2005), where he is encountered on Kashyyyk by Delta Squad before boarding his starship (which was seen earlier by Delta Squad leaving Geonosis) and departing to an unknown planet.
In Star Wars Galaxies (2003), following the establishment of the Galactic Empire, stormtroopers take Grievous's living head, and place it in his body, transforming him into a droid.
This war droid has a brief life in the Myyydril Caverns on Kashyyyk before being destroyed by an anonymous group of spacers.
The combatants loot the droid's remains, taking its weaponry and anything else of value.
The face mask ends up on the Invisible Market, where it is purchased for its artistic properties by a high-ranking Imperial admiral — purported to be Grand Admiral Thrawn.
Grievous appears as a boss and unlockable playable character Lego Star Wars (2005) and Lego Star Wars:
The Complete Saga (2007)
; he is also playable in free play mode in Lego Star Wars II:
The Original Trilogy (2006) by accessing a save file of the original Lego Star Wars.
In Lego Star Wars III: The Clone Wars (2011), Grievous is featured as a boss several times throughout the story mode, before becoming available as an unlockable playable character.
He is also a playable character in Lego Star Wars:
The Force Awakens (2016) via downloadable content.
Grievous has been featured as a playable character in the Star Wars: Battlefront series, namely Star Wars: Battlefront II (2005), Star Wars Battlefront: Elite Squadron (2009), and, most recently, Star Wars Battlefront II (2017).Grievous has also appeared as a playable character in Star Wars: The Clone Wars – Lightsaber Duels (2008), Angry Birds Star Wars II (2014) as an evil pig, and the mobile games Star Wars: Galaxy of Heroes (2015) and Star Wars: Force Arena (2017).

==
Relationships ==


===
Mentorship tree ===


==
References ==


==
External links ==
General Grievous in the StarWars.com Databank
Grievous on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
General Greivous on IMDb
Darth Plagueis is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise.
A Sith lord with the ability to manipulate life and death
, Plagueis is the mentor and murder victim of Palpatine (Darth Sidious).
The character is first mentioned in the 2005 film Star Wars:
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith, in which Palpatine frames his life as a "legend" to lure Anakin Skywalker to the dark side of the Force.
Plagueis has a more prominent presence in the Star Wars Expanded Universe.

==
Development ==
The character of Darth Plagueis was conceived by George Lucas as early as the first draft of the screenplay for Star Wars:
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith, or possibly earlier.
The first draft dates from April 2003.

==
Appearances ==


===
Revenge of the Sith ===
Darth Plagueis is first mentioned in the 2005 prequel film Revenge of the Sith, during the opera scene.
Chancellor Palpatine, who is secretly the Sith lord Darth Sidious, tells Anakin Skywalker about the tragedy of Darth Plagueis "The Wise".
Palpatine explains that Plagueis could use the dark side to prevent death and create life, powers unknown to the Jedi.
Palpatine then explains that Plagueis was killed in his sleep by his own apprentice which was none other than Palpatine himself.
Later in the film, Palpatine, as Sidious, tempts Anakin to the dark side by promising to use this power to prevent Anakin's pregnant wife Padmé Amidala from dying, as Anakin has foreseen.

===
The Rise of Skywalker novelization ===
Darth Plagueis is mentioned in Rae Carson's novelization of the 2019 film The Rise of Skywalker.
In the book, it is revealed that Palpatine had discovered Plagueis' "secret to immortality", using this knowledge to resurrect himself after his death in Return of the Jedi.
The novel further explains that Plagueis had attempted to create a powerful connection with Palpatine known as a 'Force dyad',
a concept mentioned in the film as occurring naturally between Rey and Ben Solo.
Plagueis' inability to use his powers to save himself from death is also detailed in the novelization; Plagueis "had not acted fast enough in his own moment of death" to prevent Palpatine from killing him.

===
Legends ===
In April 2014, Lucasfilm rebranded most of the licensed Star Wars novels and comics produced since the originating 1977 film Star Wars as Star Wars Legends and declared them non-canon to the franchise.
Star Wars Legends literature elaborates on Plagueis's life, apprenticeship under the Bith Sith Lord Darth Tenebrous, and mentorship of Palpatine, up until his death at the latter's hands.

====
Star Wars: Darth Plagueis ====
The character is the focus of Star Wars: Darth Plagueis, a Legends novel written by James Luceno and published on January 10, 2012.
The novel covers the later life and machinations of Darth Plagueis (born Hego Damassk II), over a roughly fifty-year period pre-dating and culminating concurrently with the climax of The Phantom Menace.
The novel details Plagueis' overthrow of his own master Darth Tenebrous; his work as head of a powerful banking consortium on the Muun homeworld; his discovery, recruitment and training of the teenaged Palpatine of Naboo; and the efforts of Plagueis to undermine the Galactic Republic and ensure the dominance of the dark side of the Force.
Even though Plagueis's plans to undermine the Galactic Republic were stopped by his death, Palpatine still succeeded in wiping out the Galactic Republic and driving the Jedi Order into ruins for his own plans.

Daryl Thomen of Newsday called Darth Plagueis "the best Star Wars publication to date."

== Reception ==
Despite never appearing on screen, Darth Plagueis has remained a popular Star Wars character.
The quote in which the character is mentioned in Revenge of the Sith has become a popular internet meme.
A popular theory regarding the origins and identity of the sequel trilogy's Supreme Leader Snoke was that he was Darth Plagueis, or a clone of him.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Darth Plagueis on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Greedo Tetsu Jr. is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise.
He was a Rodian bounty hunter from the Tetsu Clan and worked for gangster Jabba the Hutt.
He appears in the first Star Wars film during a scene where he confronts and threatens Han Solo, only to be killed by Solo.
The scene was later altered so that Greedo also shoots at Han, leading to the infamous fan controversy known as "Han shot first" with which the character has since come to be best-known.

Greedo was portrayed in 1977 by Paul Blake, as well as Maria De Aragon for some close-in pickup shots in 1977, while a younger version of him was played by Simon Rose and Oliver Walpole in a deleted scene from the 1999 prequel film Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace.
The character has made appearances in a few other pieces of Star Wars media, including the 2008 animated series Star Wars: The Clone Wars and the 2015 video game Star Wars Battlefront.

==
Appearances ==


===
Star Wars (1977) ===
Greedo is a Rodian bounty hunter working for Jabba the Hutt in Star Wars: A New Hope.
Jabba hires him to capture Han Solo, who lost the Hutt's cargo during a smuggling mission while evading pursuit from an Imperial Star Destroyer.
Greedo tracks his target to the Mos Eisley cantina on Tatooine, where Han kills him with a concealed blaster.

===
The Phantom Menace (1999) ===
In Star Wars:
Episode
I –
The Phantom Menace, a young Greedo wrestles with a young Anakin Skywalker in a deleted scene.
===
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars (2010) ===
Greedo also appears in the 2010 Star Wars:
The Clone Wars episode "Sphere of Influence".
In this series, set 20 years before A New Hope, Greedo is hired by the Trade Federation to kidnap Baron Papanoida's daughters, Che Amanwe and Chi Eekway.
He and his accomplices are ultimately foiled by Ahsoka Tano as well as the Baron and his son.
===
Other media ===
Marvel Comics's Star Wars #2, titled Six Against the Galaxy, an adaptation of the 1977 film, features the character in the iconic scene with Han.

Greedo has appeared as a playable character in most Lego Star Wars video games: Lego Star Wars II:
The Original Trilogy (2006), Lego Star Wars: The Complete Saga (2007), Lego Star Wars III:
The Clone Wars (2011), Lego Star Wars:
The Force Awakens (2016), and the upcoming Lego Star Wars: The Skywalker Saga (2021).

In Star Wars Battlefront , Greedo is one of the seven playable villains featured in the game.
On March 22, 2016, he was added along with the hero character Nien Nunb as part of the Outer Rim downloadable content.

==
Portrayal ==
In Star Wars, Paul Blake played Greedo during the main shooting, while an articulated head was built afterward and used by Maria De Aragon for pick-up shots.
Linguist Larry Ward performed the voice.
Tom Kenny providing the voice in the Star Wars: The Clone Wars television series.

==
Han shot first ==
In 2012, director George Lucas expressed his dissatisfaction with the Han-Greedo scene, believing that it depicts Solo, the film's supporting protagonist, as a "cold-blooded killer".
Lucas had altered the scene for the 1997 Special Edition re-release so that Greedo shoots first at Solo and misses, and then Solo returns fire, killing Greedo.
The scene was altered again for the 2004 DVD release so that the shots are fired at nearly the same time
and so that Solo dodges Greedo's shot.
Some fans objected to the revisions to the original film, even generating an online petition demanding that the changes be retracted.
The primary objection to the revision is that it alters Han's initially morally ambiguous character, making his later transition from anti-hero to hero less meaningful.
Lucas stated in 2012 that Greedo has always shot first, and his revisions to the film only served to "clean up the confusion".
The scene was altered again for the version of Star Wars released on the Disney streaming service, Disney+, on November 12, 2019.
In this version, Greedo says a line transcribed by fans as "maclunkey" or "ma klounkee" before shooting at Han.
The line may be a threat spoken in Huttese, as it is used that way by Sebulba in The Phantom Menace.
Additionally, the reverse shot of Greedo being shot was removed.
The changes were made by Lucas before Disney acquired the Star Wars rights in 2012.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Greedo in the StarWars.com Databank
Greedo on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Nien Nunb is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise.
Introduced in the 1983 film Return of the Jedi, he was brought to life both as a puppet and a costumed actor during the film.
Nunb was puppeteered by Mike Quinn and was portrayed by Richard Bonehill in wide shots.
The character was voiced by Kipsang Rotich, a Kenyan student who spoke in his native Kalenjin, as well as in the Kikuyu.
Quinn and Rotich both returned for the role in the sequel trilogy, namely Star Wars:
The Force Awakens (2015),
Star Wars:
The Last Jedi (2017), and Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker (2019).

Within the fictional Star Wars universe, Nien Nunb is an arms dealer of the Sullustan species who joins the Rebel Alliance in fighting the evil Galactic Empire.
His most notable feat is co-piloting the Millennium Falcon alongside Lando Calrissian during the Battle of Endor, where he helps to destroy the Death Star II.
Three decades later, Nunb is a starfighter pilot in the Resistance and helps in the fight against the First Order, including the Battles of Starkiller Base, Crait, and Exegol, being killed during the latter.

In the years since Return of the Jedi's release, the character went on to become a fan-favorite, and has made appearances in various works within the Star Wars Expanded Universe.

== Creation and portrayal ==
Nunb's name originated from the fact that he was referred to as "Number Nine" on creature packaging.
In an interview, Richard Marquand described Nien Nunb as, "…a Muppet, a guy under the deck does his thing.
He's got some dialogue to do.
He's got this funny, twitchy face.
He's a terrific character in my mind".

Nien Nunb was brought to life by both a puppeteer and as a costumed-actor during the film.
Initially, he was just to appear in the briefing room scenes, and the Endor celebration.
For these appearances he was portrayed by stuntman Richard Bonehill, in costume and mask.
However, Nunb was later chosen, by series creator George Lucas, to appear in the Millennium Falcon, as Lando Calrissian's co-pilot.
Since the character now had dialogue, it was decided that the mask would be reworked into a puppet, with mechanisms to allow for moving lips and eyes.
For these scenes, in the cockpit, the role was handed over to puppeteer Mike Quinn.
The character was voiced by Bill Kipsang Rotich, a Kenyan student and native Kalenjin speaker, who spoke in Kikuyu and Haya for the role.
After voicing the character, Rotich became a local celebrity in his home country, as many Kenyan viewers could hear their own languages in a Star Wars film, and understand the character's dialogue.
Quinn returned to the role for The Force Awakens, without Bonehill, who died in February 2015.
Rotich was also tracked down in his native Kenya, by actor Christian Simpson, to voice the character again.

==
Appearances ==


===
Films ===


====
Return of the Jedi (1983) ====
Nunb is introduced as a member of the Alliance Fleet, selected to fly as co-pilot to General Lando Calrissian
(Billy Dee Williams) aboard the Millennium Falcon during the Battle of Endor, where they lead the assault to destroy the second Death Star.
Before the battle, when the Alliance Fleet gathers near Sullust, Nunb expresses concern about the plan of attack and whether General Han Solo (Harrison Ford), Princess Leia Organa (Carrie Fisher), and their team would be able to successfully destroy the Death Star's shield generator on the moon of Endor before the fleet arrived.
Calrissian assures him that Solo would have the shield down on schedule.

With Nunb and Calrissian in the cockpit of the Millennium Falcon leading the attack, the Alliance Fleet arrives over Endor to find that the shield generator is still operational, quickly realizing that the battle is a trap set by Emperor Palpatine (Ian McDiarmid) to engage and destroy the Rebel Alliance once and for all.
The fleet remains over Endor and engages Imperial forces in the hopes that Solo and his team would still be able to complete their mission and destroy the generator.
The fleet keeps to fighting Imperial TIE fighters and Star Destroyers, particularly once they learn that the Death Star is operational.
Once Solo's team destroys the shield generator, the Millennium Falcon enters the Death Star's superstructure and fires the shot that begins a chain reaction that destroys the battle station.
Nunb and Calrissian escape the Death Star just before it is consumed in a massive explosion.
Nunb joins his fellow Rebels and the native Ewoks on the surface of Endor in celebrating the destruction of the Death Star and the downfall of the Empire.

====
The Force Awakens (2015) ====
Mike Quinn confirmed on October 19, 2015 via Facebook that he would return in Star Wars:
The Force Awakens as Nien Nunb.
Later on December 6, the character's appearance was seen in a TV spot for the film.
Kipsang Rotich also reprised his role as the voice for Nien Nunb, having been tracked down by actor Christian Simpson.

In the film, when the First Order destroys the Hosnian System with the Starkiller Base superweapon, the Resistance base on D'Qar becomes the next target.
Quickly establishing a plan to destroy Starkiller Base, Nunb, along with the rest of the Starfighter Corps, flies to the planet in an attempt to destroy its thermal oscillator and disable the weapon.
During the battle, many Resistance pilots are killed before the oscillator is destroyed by Poe Dameron (Oscar Isaac).
Nunb is one of seven surviving X-wing pilots, and he celebrates with the rest of the Resistance upon returning to D'Qar.
====
The Last Jedi (2017) ====
Mike Quinn reprised his role as Nien Nunb in Star Wars:
The Last Jedi, the second installment of the sequel trilogy.
Kipsang Rotich, on the other hand, did not, because the character doesn't have any lines in this film.
In the film, Nien Nunb evacuates alongside his fellow soldiers from the Resistance base of D'Qar, and is present aboard the Raddus during the battle of the Resistance's bombers against the First Order.
Nunb later escapes offscreen alongside Leia and other Resistance members to the old Rebellion base on the planet of Crait.
On Crait, Nien pilots a ski speeder along with Poe Dameron, rogue stormtrooper Finn (John Boyega)
, Resistance mechanic Rose Tico (Kelly Marie Tran) and X-wing pilot C’ai Threnalli.
He (along with Poe, Threnalli and Tico) has to bail out as the super laser, which they were trying to destroy, becomes too powerful.
Nunb is seen at the end of the film talking with Finn as the remaining members of the Resistance escape from the clutches of the First Order once more.
====
The Rise of Skywalker (2019) ====
Kipsang Rotich returned as Nien Nunb for the first time since The Force Awakens, and Mike Quinn returned as his puppeteer.

Over one year since the last fight with the First Order, Nien Nunb follows the Resistance to relocate to Ajan Kloss, where they discuss how they are going to defeat the resurrected Emperor Palpatine (Ian McDiarmid) and his Sith Empire.
Minutes before take-off, as the Resistance plan their final offensive, Nunb suggests to the Resistance that there aren't enough of them to defeat Palpatine's Sith fleet.
Poe persuades him and all of the Resistance that that is what Palpatine wants them to think - but it is not true.
During the climatic final Battle on Exegol, Nunb flies the Tantive IV, Leia’s personal craft.
He loses control of the ship when Palpatine uses Force lightning to disable all of the Resistance ships in an attempt to stop them from destroying his fleet.
While Nunb's fate is left ambiguous in the film, its novelization confirms that the crew of the Tantive IV, including Nunb, are among those killed by Palpatine.

===
Comics ===


====
Princess Leia (2015) ====
In the comic Star Wars: Princess Leia (2015), which is set shortly after the end of Star Wars Episode IV:
A New Hope
, Nunb helps Leia with a mission to unite the few survivors of the destruction of Alderaan.
On his native planet,  Sullust, Nunb helps Leia smuggle the Alderaanians away from the Empire.
He also provides the arms in his ship to Leia and her people, to use against the Empire.
Leia presents him with a necklace that once belonged to her adoptive mother, Queen Breha Organa of Alderaan, as a token of her gratitude.

Later in the mission, Leia turns herself over to Imperial Commander Dreed on the desert world of Skaradosh in exchange for the release of Tula, an Imperial officer from Alderaan; Tula's sister, Tace, is part of Leia's group of refugees and Tula secretly manipulates her sister for information about Leia’s whereabouts.
Before she can be taken captive, the Mellcrawler arrives to rescue her, with Nunb having slipped the ship onto the planet without the orbiting Imperial forces noticing.
Leia thanks Nunb for his efforts,
but he says that the real test would be making it past the Imperial forces alive.
Nunb launches a decoy to fool the Imperial vessels, leaving them to follow the sensor decoy as the Mellcrawler avoids their detection.
The trick is successful and the Star Destroyer crew believes the Mellcrawler has been destroyed, and Leia with it.
At that moment, a fleet of Alderaanians from Espirion arrive to assist Leia.
The arrival of the fleet allows the Alderaanians to destroy the Star Destroyer, and the Alderaanian fleet escapes the wrath of the Empire.
Nunb later attends a celebration to celebrate the success of the mission to unite them.

===
Video games ===
Nien Nunb appears as a playable Hero character in the Outer Rim expansion pack for the video game Star Wars Battlefront (2015).
He is a "Unique" unit in the 2017 free-to-play mobile game Star Wars Force Arena by Netmarble.
He is partnered with Lando Calrissian.
He also appears as a playable character in Lego Star Wars:
The Force Awakens and is expected to appear in the upcoming Lego Star Wars: the Skywalker Saga.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Nien Nunb in the StarWars.com Databank
Nien Nunb on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Ahsoka Tano is a character in the Star Wars franchise.
Introduced as the Jedi Padawan of Anakin Skywalker, who later becomes Sith Lord Darth Vader, she is a protagonist of the 2008 animated film Star Wars: The Clone Wars and the subsequent television series.
Ahsoka reappears in Star Wars Rebels, where she uses the codename Fulcrum, and as a voiceover cameo in Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker.
Ashley Eckstein voices Ahsoka in these appearances.
Ahsoka is also the main character of the eponymous novel Star Wars: Ahsoka, which has Eckstein narrating the audiobook version.
Ahsoka's live-action debut was in the second season of The Mandalorian, portrayed by Rosario Dawson.
Dawson will return to play Ahsoka in her own series Ahsoka on Disney+, releasing in 2022.

Although initially disliked by both fans and critics, Ahsoka eventually developed into a more complex, well-rounded character, and ultimately became a fan favorite.
Serving as a foil for Anakin Skywalker, she has been highlighted as a strong female character of the franchise.

== Creation and development ==


===
Concept ===
Ahsoka was developed to illustrate how Anakin Skywalker develops from the brash, undisciplined Padawan apprentice in Star Wars: Episode II – Attack of the Clones (2002) to the more reserved Jedi Knight in Episode III – Revenge of the Sith (2005).
Star Wars creator George Lucas, who had two daughters, also wanted the character to appeal to girls.
Early in development, Ahsoka's name was "Ashla".
Lucas renamed her after the ancient Indian emperor Ashoka; the spelling was then altered by screenwriter Henry Gilroy.
The Clone Wars supervising director and writer Dave Filoni wrote a fable about Ahsoka's early childhood to help develop the character.
He imagined the discovery that she has "the right stuff" to become a Jedi would be a cause for celebration in her hometown.
Filoni said he is protective of the Ahsoka character.
Giving Anakin responsibility for a Padawan was meant to place the character in a role that forced him to become more cautious and responsible.
It would also provide him with insight into his relationship with his own master, Obi-Wan Kenobi, and depict how their relationship matured.
Ahsoka and Anakin's relationship was seen as an essential story arc spanning both the animated film and the Clone Wars television series.

===
Writing ===
Filoni initially struggled with writing Ahsoka because he had "zero perspective" on what it was like to be a 14-year-old girl.
He, therefore, shifted his focus and instead wrote Ahsoka primarily as a Jedi who just happens to be an adolescent female.
Filoni said he "has always had a story in mind" for Ahsoka's overall development.
He began thinking about the final confrontation between Ahsoka and Vader ever since he created Ahsoka; different iterations had different endings, including one in which Vader kills Ahsoka just as she slashes open his helmet to reveal Anakin's scarred face.
Ashley Eckstein, who primarily voiced Ahsoka, said she and the writers were aware that audiences initially found the character annoying, and that there was a "fine line" between Ahsoka being bratty and becoming endearing.
Because production was a year ahead of what was broadcast, with Ahsoka developing over that time, Eckstein implored fans to be patient with the character's growth.
Although Ahsoka leaves the Jedi Order at the end of The Clone Wars' fifth season, the storyline initially had her return to the Order.
Filoni said this would be the "normal" arc and suggested to Lucas that she instead remain expelled; Lucas agreed.
Lucas believed Ahsoka survived Order 66,
the command that led the Republic's clone army to murder the Jedi.
The Fulcrum character introduced early in Star Wars Rebels was always understood to be Ahsoka.
Filoni, who served as executive producer and co-creator of Rebels, worked with Lucas on identifying what Ahsoka would know about Anakin's fate.
Filoni also collaborated with executive producer Simon Kinberg and season one executive producer Greg Weisman on developing Ahsoka's role as a Rebel agent.
The show's writers were excited for Ahsoka's return in the second season, and Filoni was anxious about Rebels instead becoming "The Ahsoka Tano Show".
Consequently, Filoni required that Ahsoka play a role in service of Rebels' main characters, Ezra Bridger and Kanan Jarrus; he saw Ahsoka's new role as similar to the one played by Obi-Wan Kenobi in Star Wars.
Although Ahsoka is more mature in Rebels, Filoni wanted "aspects of that kid who was there to shine through".
He initially envisioned Ahsoka as a more "passive player" not engaged in combat, but later decided it was more appropriate to see Ahsoka as a warrior during a turbulent time.
Ahsoka's presence was necessary to allow Darth Vader to encounter the show's lead characters without the latter being destroyed; Ahsoka can stand toe-to-toe with Vader.
Filoni cites fans' passion for the character as one reason for Ahsoka's prominence in Clone Wars and Rebels.

===
Voice acting ===
Eckstein said Filoni wanted her to bring some of her own personality into the Ahsoka character; he told her that her actions and speech between audition takes had a bigger impact on her getting the role than the actual audition.
Once production on The Clone Wars began, it took about six months for Eckstein and the writers to understand Ahsoka; consequently, much of the dialogue for the first half of season one was re-recorded to depict the character better.
Eckstein also credits the casting of Matt Lanter as Anakin, which occurred halfway through the first season, with helping solidify the Ahsoka character.
Eckstein reprised the role of Ahsoka for Rebels, although she did not do all of Fulcrum's voice work.
She learned about Ahsoka's return about a year before the first season's finale aired and said it was hard to keep it a secret.
Eckstein said Ahsoka developed a quiet confidence and quiet strength
the younger character doesn't possess, but sometimes she played Ahsoka too seriously; she pointed out that "snippiness" and determination are still part of Ahsoka's personality.
Eckstein pitched her voice down a bit but, because she and Ahsoka were now much closer in age, generally spoke like herself.
Not knowing Ahsoka's experiences between The Clone Wars and Rebels at times presented challenges for Eckstein's performance.
Filoni avoids giving the actors plot details that might inappropriately affect their performance; for example, he did not tell Eckstein whether Ahsoka survives her duel with Darth Vader lest Eckstein telegraph something in her performance that the character would not know.

===
Appearance ===
Ahsoka's design evolved over three years before her introduction in the Clone Wars film.
Her appearance was inspired by San in Princess Mononoke.
Ahsoka initially appears in what Wired called a "tube-top-and-miniskirt costume.
"
In the third season, Ahsoka and other characters received new costumes.
Filoni said the changes were meant to bring the show's aesthetic closer to that of Revenge of the Sith and were made possible by improved animation techniques.
For the seventh and final season of Clone Wars, Ahsoka's design was once again tweaked due to improvements in animation technology.
Her costume was also changed to a more grayish-blue color, similar to her appearance Star Wars Rebels, which aired prior to the season.
Ahsoka often uses a reverse lightsaber grip, similar to that of the Japanese film character Zatoichi.
Along with the costume change in the third season of Clone Wars, Ahsoka also received a second lightsaber.
In the seventh and final season, she received new blue lightsabers.
Ahsoka's armor in Rebels is based on a "pseudo-samurai look" influenced by photographs of samurai women.
The armor is meant to appear as if she found it in an ancient Jedi temple, and her lightsabers' colorless blades indicate she is neither a Jedi nor a Sith.
Filoni said the white lightsabers appear much better than he anticipated.
Her facial markings were changed to show that she has aged.
It was "new ground" for the production team to shift Ahsoka's animation style to reflect her older age.

== Depiction ==


===
Film ===


====
The Clone Wars (2008) ====
Ahsoka Tano was introduced the 2008 Clone Wars animated film (serving as a pilot for the television series of the same name) as a 14-year-old Padawan apprentice assigned to Anakin Skywalker.
Yoda assigns her to Anakin to teach him a greater sense of responsibility, and Anakin is initially frustrated by this decision.
Their early interactions are "playfully contentious", with Anakin calling her "Snips" for her "snippy" attitude and Ahsoka calling him "Skyguy" as a pun on his surname.
After earning Anakin's respect on a dangerous mission, Ahsoka joins him on a quest to rescue Jabba the Hutt's infant son.
Her impetuous nature both annoys and endears her to her master, and, by the end of the film, Anakin reveals a newfound affection for his padawan.

====
The Rise of Skywalker (2019) ====
Ahsoka Tano makes a vocal cameo in The Rise of Skywalker as one of the past Jedi who help Rey in her battle against the resurrected Darth Sidious.
Ashley Eckstein returned to voice the character.

===
Television ===


====
The Clone Wars (2008–2020) ====
Ahsoka is a lead character in six of the seven seasons of The Clone Wars.
She is a padawan-commander of the 501st Legion in the Grand Army of the Republic and continues to learn the ways of the Jedi as Anakin's apprentice.
The two develop a mutual fondness, at times taking great risks to protect or save one another.
Some of Anakin's actions taken out of concern for Ahsoka expose his darker tendencies, such as his torture of prisoners who may know her location when she goes missing.
Ahsoka also finds mentorship from Captain Rex, a clone trooper with whom she and Anakin serve throughout the war.
During the final arc of season five, Ahsoka is framed and imprisoned for a deadly explosion and a subsequent murder.
Although eventually exonerated, she becomes disillusioned with the Jedi Council and leaves the Jedi Order in the season finale.
Anakin is greatly affected by this ordeal and this begins to shake his trust in the Jedi Council.

Filoni said an initial finale concept for The Clone Wars would have had Rex escape Order 66, and his and Ahsoka's presence elsewhere would have explained both characters' absence from Revenge of the Sith.
Ahsoka returns in the seventh and final season of The Clone Wars, which aired in 2020 on Disney+.
She is the focus of two of the three story arcs featured in the season.
The second one, set during the events of Revenge of the Sith, sees her briefly reuniting with Anakin and acting as an advisor to Rex (promoted to Commander) in the 332nd Company (split from the 501st Legion) during the Siege of Mandalore to capture the former Sith Lord Maul.
When she confronts Maul, he reveals that Darth Sidious intends to make Anakin his new apprentice and offers to join forces to prevent this, but she doesn't believe him and fights him.
Ahsoka defeats and captures Maul, but as she is preparing to take him to Coruscant, she senses her former master in trouble, though is not actually aware that he has fallen to the dark side and helped kill Mace Windu.
Order 66 is issued, causing Ahsoka's clone troopers, including Rex, to turn on her.
She escapes and manages to remove Rex's chip controlling his brain, while also freeing Maul to create a distraction.
When the Venator-class Star Destroyer Tribunal they are on crashes on a small moon, Ahsoka and Rex survive and bury all the deceased clone troopers, along with the former's lightsaber, before parting ways.
The final scene of the series depicts Darth Vader leading a search party on the moon and walking up to the remains of the ship.
He notices Ahsoka's blade on the ground, picks it up, and ignites it, before leaving with the saber in silence.

====
Rebels (2014–2018) ====
Ahsoka is a secretive rebel agent in the first season of Star Wars Rebels, which takes place 14 years after The Clone Wars concludes.
Operating under the codename "Fulcrum", she provides the rebel crew of the Ghost with intelligence and supplies.
Until her identity is revealed in the season finale, she disguises her appearance by using an altered voice and appearing as a hooded hologram.

She becomes a recurring character in the second season, continuing to help lead a group of rebel forces and working with the Ghost's crew.
Having assumed that Anakin died like most other Jedi at the end of the Clone Wars, she is overwhelmed to recognize her mentor under "a layer of hate" in Darth Vader.
Later in the season, a vision of Anakin blames her for leaving him and allowing him to fall to the dark side.
In the season finale, Ahsoka duels with Darth Vader inside a Sith temple on Malachor-V allowing her friends from the Ghost to escape Vader and the temple's destruction.
As the episode concludes, Darth Vader is shown injured and leaving the temple, watched by a green and white owl.
The owl, previously a companion to Ahsoka in the show and an avatar of the Daughter of Mortis, then flies back into the temple to witness
Ahsoka seemingly walking deeper inside its walls.
Filoni said Ahsoka's fate is ambiguous and "a bit open-ended" though Eckstein believed the character to still be alive.
In the fourth-season episode, "A World Between Worlds", Ahsoka's fate is finally revealed.
Ezra Bridger, having ended up in the realm "between worlds and time" within the Jedi temple on Lothal and guided by Ahsoka's convoy Morai, pulls her out of the moment before Vader could deliver the deathblow and thus altered her fate.
Ahsoka is updated on what occurred to the Ghost crew while convincing Ezra to not prevent Kanan's fate as he would risk losing his own life.
Palpatine then makes his presence known as he attempts to force Ezra into bringing him into the realm.
Ahsoka helps Ezra escape while returning (with Morai) to her timeline moments after the Sith temple collapsed, vowing to find Ezra and the crew again.
Ahsoka makes a return appearance in the epilogue of the series finale "Family Reunion and Farewell", returning to Lothal following the events of the Battle of Endor to join Sabine Wren in her quest to find Ezra, who disappeared during Lothal's liberation.

====
The Mandalorian (2020) ====
Rosario Dawson expressed interest in playing Ahsoka Tano in early 2017, with some fan support.
In March 2020, Dawson was reported to be appearing as the character in the second season of The Mandalorian.
The next month, Dawson said the casting was yet to be confirmed.
In October, the German Disney+ Instagram account published a story naming Dawson as part of the upcoming season's cast.
Ahsoka made an appearance in the fifth episode of the season, released on Disney+
on November 27, 2020.
During her search for Grand Admiral Thrawn, she attempts to liberate the city of Calidan on Corvus from Imperial occupation, and encounters the titular character, who was told to seek her out by Bo-Katan Kryze so that she could train "The Child".
Communing with him through the Force, she learns that the child's name is Grogu and that he was raised at the Jedi Temple on Coruscant, before being rescued during the Great Jedi Purge and hidden for his own safety, which is why he suppresses his Force powers.
Sensing great fear in Grogu, and a deep connection with the Mandalorian, Ahsoka refuses to take him as an apprentice, fearing that he could follow the same dark path as her former master.
After the Mandalorian helps her liberate Calidan, Ahsoka tells him to take Grogu to the Jedi Temple on Tython, where he might be able to reach out to another Jedi through the Force.

====
Ahsoka ====
In December 2020, Lucasfilm announced Ahsoka would be getting her own limited series on Disney+, titled Ahsoka.
Developed by Jon Favreau and Dave Filoni, it exists alongside The Mandalorian and Rangers of the New Republic through interconnected stories culminating in a "climactic story event".
Dawson reprises her role as Ahsoka Tano.
===
Other media ===
Filoni said he does not want Ahsoka thought of as an animated character, but rather as a Star Wars character who can exist "in all forms of media".
Ahsoka appears in the Star Wars Forces of Destiny series, in the comic Touching Darkness, and as a collectable, playable character in the video game Disney Infinity 3.0.
At Star Wars Celebration Europe 2016, Filoni, Eckstein, and Lucasfilm Story Group member Pablo Hidalgo held a panel about Ahsoka's "Untold Tales" that occur between The Clone Wars and Rebels.

====
Ahsoka (2016) ====
Star Wars:
Ahsoka is a young-adult novel by E. K. Johnston published in October 2016.
It is set between the events of The Clone Wars and Rebels, and makes several references to Ahsoka's "Untold Tales".
Filoni was heavily involved in developing the novel, and the cover art by Jason P. Wojtowicz is based on a sketch Filoni created several years prior.
Eckstein narrates the audiobook version.
The novel was on the New York Times best sellers list and in the category of young adult hardcovers it reached number one shortly after release.
A year after the events of Revenge of the Sith, Ahsoka gains work as a mechanic and freighter pilot with the powerful Fardi clan on the planet Thabeska.
She is forced to go into hiding after exposing her Force powers while trying to save the life of four-year old Hedala Fardi, the youngest Fardi daughter.
Ahsoka settles down on the agrarian moon of Raada, where she finds work as a mechanic and befriends several local farmers, including the teenage sisters Kaeden and Miara Larte, and their guardian Vartan.
The Galactic Empire subsequently establishes a presence on Raada and forces the farmers to plant new crops, which leach the moon's soils.
Ahsoka becomes the leader of a resistance movement.
However, the planned uprising goes awry and Ahsoka exposes her Force powers during a skirmish with Imperial forces.
In response, the Empire dispatches a Jedi-hunting Inquisitor known as the Sixth Brother to hunt Ahsoka.

Having attracted the attention of the Empire, Ahsoka is forced to leave Raada.
Alderaanian Senator Bail Organa takes an interest in Imperial reports about Ahsoka and decides to find her.
Returning to the Fardis, Ahsoka resumes work as a pilot and mechanic.
She learns that a "shadow" (who turns out to be the Sixth Brother) has been stalking the Force-sensitive Hedala.
With the Empire tightening its grip on Thabeska, the Fardi patriarch advises Ahsoka to leave.
Ahsoka's ship is captured by two pilots in the service of Organa.
Mistaking the pilots for threats, Ahsoka knocks them unconscious.
She encounters R2-D2 and convinces him to smuggle her aboard Organa's corvette.
Ahsoka forges an alliance with Organa in return for his help in protecting Force-sensitive children from the Empire.
Returning to Raada, she finds Miara and learns that the Sixth Brother captured her older sister Kaeden.
Following a lightsaber duel, Ahsoka defeats and kills the Sixth Brother, and takes his Kyber crystals to forge her new twin lightsabers.
After freeing Kaeden, Ahsoka organizes an evacuation of Raada's population with Organa's help.
Ahsoka then decides to join Organa's rebellion while the Larte sisters and the other refugees settle down on Alderaan.
Meanwhile, the Empire dispatches the Grand Inquisitor, a perennial antagonist from Star Wars Rebels, to hunt down Ahsoka.

==
Critical response ==
After her introduction, some critics called Ahsoka annoying and predicted the character would die before The Clone Wars series ended because she does not appear in Revenge of the Sith.
The Los Angeles Times called Ahsoka a "carefully calculated-to-be-cute" character in The Clone Wars film.
Wired criticized Ahsoka's "half-naked" appearance in The Clone Wars' first two seasons, calling her third-season costume change "more appropriate".
Blastr said Ahsoka's initial immaturity gives the character room to grow, saying she becomes "a well-rounded and complex character in every sense".
Ahsoka's youth aided her in being a point-of-view character for younger viewers.
io9 called Ahsoka's development arc one of the best aspects of The Clone Wars, highlighting the character's role in exploring the nuances of war and the flaws of the Jedi Order.
According to Tech Times, Ahsoka's maturation and development mirror the show's, and the producers chose wisely in making Ahsoka the audience's "entry point" to The Clone Wars.
Chris Taylor called Ahsoka's decision to leave the Jedi Order "the show's most shocking cliffhanger".
Ashley Eckstein was nominated for the 2012 and 2013
"Best Female Lead Vocal Performance in a Television Series - Action/Drama" awards from Behind the Voice Actors.
The Mary Sue said Ahsoka's relationship with Anakin is critical in understanding his development between Attack of the Clones and Revenge of the Sith, and the publication called Ahsoka a foil for Anakin's growth.
Blastr commented that Anakin's interactions with Ahsoka help show that he is a powerful Jedi and war hero.
Blastr also hypothesized that Anakin's sense of failure when Ahsoka leaves the Jedi contributes to his fall to the dark side; io9 posited that Anakin might have succeeded in reforming the Jedi if Ahsoka had stayed with him.
io9 said Ahsoka, more than Anakin, articulates moral guidance in The Clone Wars.
Blastr identified Ahsoka as one of the most important characters in Star Wars, especially for young girls who, until that point, had not seen a potent female Jedi depicted on screen.
Erika Travis of California Baptist University said Ahsoka is "compassionate and feminine, without being overtly sexualized".
Mara Wood called Ahsoka a feminist icon, adding that Ahsoka is one of several characters that make The Clone Wars superior to the original and prequel trilogies in depicting strong women.
Wood added that Ahsoka probably shows the most growth of any woman in the Star Wars canon.

==
Relationships ==


==
References ==
Footnotes
Citations


==
External links ==
Ahsoka Tano in the StarWars.com Databank
Ahsoka Tano on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Watto is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise, featured in the films The Phantom Menace and Attack of the Clones.
He is computer-generated and is voiced by voice actor Andy Secombe.
He is a mean-tempered, greedy Toydarian, and owner of a second-hand goods store in Mos Espa on the planet Tatooine.
Among Watto's belongings are the slaves Shmi Skywalker and her son, Anakin.
He acquires them after winning a podracing bet with Gardulla the Hutt, and he puts them both to work in his store.
Anakin demonstrates an incredible aptitude for equipment repair, and Watto decides to profit from it by having the boy fix various broken equipment in the store.
He eventually loses Anakin in a podracing bet with Qui-Gon Jinn when he bets on a competitor, Sebulba, who is defeated by Anakin.

==
Concept and creation ==
Design director Doug Chiang described Watto's design as "this conglomeration of odd things that really didn't fit, but that in the end gave him a very unique and powerful personality".
While seeking the approval of George Lucas, Chiang put up an amalgalm of different concepts, including  Terryl Whitlatch's pudgy parrot, Iain Craig's four armed beast with a cigar, and the head in an early Neimoidian picture by Chiang himself, featuring a hooked trunk and crooked teeth.
Chiang added hummingbird wings to the Toydarian design, along with having Watto wear a vest and a tool belt, and Lucas approved, only asking for webbed feet and pants.
Modeling supervisor Geoff Campell was skeptical of having a chubby alien with wings, so it was imagined that the Toydarians are filled with gas, making the wings only propel him instead of supporting his weight.
Animation supervisor Rob Coleman realized that the alien's dental work would need some modification when the time came to create Watto on screen, as Watto's craggy teeth made lip-syncing difficult.
To solve the problem, Coleman broke off one of Watto's incisors, giving him a "corner-of-the-mouth" vernacular.
His expressions were based on video footage of voice actor Andy Secombe, photographs of Coleman imitating the character, and modeler Steve Alpin saying Watto's lines to a mirror.
Alec Guinness performing as Fagin in Oliver Twist was used as an influence in the character's development.
The sound of his wings flapping is a looped recording of sound designer Ben Burtt opening and closing an umbrella.

==
Appearances ==
Watto first appears in Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace, the first title chronologically in the Star Wars series.
He has both an ability for haggling and a resistance to the "Jedi mind trick", a technique used to persuade people.
He is both a junk dealer and slave owner on the planet Tatooine, possessing both Shmi Skywalker and her son Anakin.
When challenged to a bet for Anakin's freedom by Qui-Gon Jinn, Watto agrees.
After Anakin beats Sebulba (whom Watto bets on), a competing racer that he challenged throughout the race he participated in, he was let go.
However, Watto (who believes Qui-Gon cheated on him) considers calling off the bet, but gives in when Qui-Gon threatens to have him talk things over with the Hutt Clan.
Watto makes a final appearance in the sequel Episode II – Attack of the Clones, which takes place 10 years after the original film, the now-adult Anakin returns to Tatooine to find his mother.
Searching Mos Espa, he finds Watto sitting outside the shop at a small stall.
They reunite on somewhat amicable terms and Watto tells Anakin that he sold Shmi some years ago to a moisture farmer named Cliegg Lars, who freed and married her.
Watto then takes Anakin and Padmé to look through his records to find her.

Watto makes multiple further appearances in the Star Wars Expanded Universe; one such appearance details his time on his home planet before he came to Tatooine during a war.
It also tells how he sustained his broken tusk and disabled leg.
He later learns his business savvy from the Jawas, native to the planet Tatooine.
In the non-canonical Star Wars comic book Star Wars: Visionaries, Watto is shown to have been killed by Darth Maul (whose appearance here predates the canonical revelation of his survival of the events of The Phantom Menace) during Maul's process of tracking down his nemesis Obi-Wan Kenobi, to gain vengeance for his defeat during the Battle of Naboo.

His son Blatto makes an appearance in the non-canonical television special Phineas and Ferb:
Star Wars.

Watto has also been produced as a Lego figure and featured in the Lego Star Wars video games, in addition to numerous other appearances in the form of collectibles and other merchandising.

== Reception ==
Editors for IGN ranked Watto 78th in their list of Top 100 Star Wars characters.
They wrote that he was "one of the most confusing scientific anomalies" due to "the idea that a creature so potbellied is able to stay afloat for so long".
They added that he was "no prince" for his unscrupulous deals.

In the book The Holy Family and Its Legacy, author Albrecht Koschorke discusses the presence of "The Holy Family" in The Phantom Menace, stating that while there was no "solicitous guardian watching over the mother and the holy child," Watto acts in a similar position as a "man who possesses patriarchal powers without being the father."
===
Allegations of antisemitism ===
It has been suggested that the character is offensive because of his perceived similarities to a stereotypical Jew, having a large hooked nose, beady eyes, unkempt facial hair, speaking in a gravelly voice, and being portrayed as greedy and covetous.
J. Hoberman of The Village Voice called him "the most blatant ethnic stereotype" due to his hooked nose.
Bruce Gottlieb of Slate magazine criticized him as well, comparing his character to the antisemitic notion that the Jewish race is "behind the slave trade".
Patricia J. Williams of The Nation stated that Watto was also described as a stereotype of Arabs, but that he was "more comprehensively anti-Semitic—both anti-Arab and anti-Jew."
She added that Watto reminded her of an "anti-Semitic caricature published in Vienna at the turn of the 20th century."
Jane Prettyman of the American Review noted that after leaving the theater, she heard two young boys describe him as "that weird little Jew guy with wings".
Prettyman described his depiction as "not at all subtle", and said that "it can be counted on to flush out already-formed Jew-haters among young audiences and give them permission to continue their hatred out loud."
Looking back on the character on the twentieth anniversary of the film, essayist Aaron Freedman both acknowledges the stereotypical aspects of the character while admitting that as a boy he empathized with Watto as "the only representation we Jews get in the Star Wars franchise," suggesting that the portrayal of Watto as struggling to survive in a society shaped by forces beyond his control echoed that of both Jews throughout history and the Shakespearean character Shylock.

===
Crazy Watto fan film ===
Crazy Watto is a two-minute-long fan film that made its debut on the Internet in 2000.
The film is a spoof of used car deal ads shown on television, featuring Watto.
He offers up for sale familiar objects such as an X-wing.
The film played at the 2005 Cannes Film Festival, and is a popular fan film at many science fiction conventions.
The film was originally hosted by TheForce.
Net, but is now part of The Official Star Wars Fan Film Awards on AtomFilms.
==
References ==


==
External links ==
Watto in the StarWars.com Databank
Watto on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Bib Fortuna is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise.
The Twi'lek majordomo and chief aide of the crime lord Jabba
the Hutt
, Bib is Jabba's closest associate.
Fortuna first appeared in Return of the Jedi (1983), the final entry in the original Star Wars trilogy.
He also appeared briefly in the prequel trilogy film The Phantom Menace (1999)
and in the second season of television series The Mandalorian (2020), as well as in other Star Wars media, including novels, comic books, video games, and radio dramas.

Fortuna was created by Return of the Jedi co-writers Lawrence Kasdan and George Lucas, and was designed by Phil Tippett based upon early sketches by concept artists Nilo Rodis-Jamero and Ralph McQuarrie.
The character was portrayed by Michael Carter in Return of the Jedi, who was cast based upon his stage acting experience; the actor did not know it was a Star Wars film until after he accepted the role.
Erik Bauersfeld provided the voice of Fortuna in Return of the Jedi, and sound editor Matthew Wood portrayed the character in The Phantom Menace and The Mandalorian.

Although few details about him were revealed in his film appearances, other Star Wars works have established Fortuna's back story, including his past as a slave trader who was sentenced to death on his home planet of Ryloth.
Although he outwardly appears loyal and obedient to Jabba, Fortuna secretly despises his master and actively plots to assassinate him and take over his criminal operation.
Fortuna survives the events of Return of the Jedi in the Star Wars Legends canon, which encompasses all licensed Star Wars stories outside of the films prior to The Walt Disney Company acquiring the franchise in 2012.
However, the new set of official canon created after that acquisition establishes that Fortuna was not killed during the climactic battle in Return of the Jedi, but assumed Jabba's place as crime lord until being killed by Boba Fett five years later.

It took about eight-and-a-half hours to apply the character's makeup for the first time in Return of the Jedi, which included extensive casts and molds, a large rubber headpiece, day glow orange contact lenses, sharpened false teeth, and claw-like finger extensions.
Fortuna has been described as a fan-favorite and one of the most memorable characters from Star Wars, and has been included on several lists of the best characters in the franchise.
Several toys and merchandise works have been created for the character, and an original action figure prototype sold for £36,000 in a 2019 auction.

==
Character biography ==


===
Back story ===
Bib Fortuna is a member of the Twi'lek species, humanoids distinguished by the pair of long tentacular appendages that protrude from the back of their heads, which are known as lekku.
Fortuna is the first Twi'lek character to appear in Star Wars, although the species did not receive a name until the publication of the Star Wars Sourcebook, a 1987 sourcebook for Star Wars: The Roleplaying Game.
With pale, mucus-covered skin and sharp, snaggly teeth, Fortuna is originally from the planet Ryloth, the Twi'lek homeworld.
Fortuna works as the majordomo and chief aide for Jabba the Hutt, a slug-like alien and one of the most powerful crime lords in the galaxy.
In this capacity, Fortuna controls most operations within Jabba's palace on the desert planet of Tatooine.
Among these duties are welcoming visitors who come to the palace, and vetting them before they appear before Jabba.
Fortuna's dialogue in the film is delivered in Huttese, the fictional language also spoken by Jabba.
Outside of the films, Bib Fortuna's back story was established through media in the Star Wars Expanded Universe, which encompasses all licensed stories in the Star Wars universe outside of the nine main feature films, such as novels, comic books, video games, and television shows.
With the 2012 acquisition of Lucasfilm by The Walt Disney Company, most of the licensed Star Wars novels and comics produced since the originating 1977 film were rebranded as Star Wars Legends and declared non-canon to the franchise in April 2014.
As a result, storylines and character histories established for Fortuna before April 2014 are part of the Legends canon, but not the Disney canon.
In his back story established by the Expanded Universe, Bib Fortuna is born into a family engaged in the Outer Rim portion of the galaxy.
He grows wealthy as a slave trader before working for Jabba the Hutt, selling fellow members of his own species into servitude.
Fortuna is also a smuggler of an illicit substance called spice, and is one of the first to widely sell a highly addictive drug called ryll from Ryloth to other planets.
This brings Ryloth to the attention of the Galactic Empire, and leads to a planetwide breakdown of order.
Fortuna becomes infamous as a result, and is sentenced to death on his home planet, but he escapes and flees to the planet Tatooine.
There he becomes the head of Jabba the Hutt's smuggling operations for a drug called glitterstim, the first in a series of successively more prominent positions that eventually leads him to becoming Jabba's majordomo.
Fortuna later returns to Ryloth with an army of Jabba's henchmen to enact revenge for his death sentence, burning seven of the planet's cities and capturing slaves and riches for Jabba.
Fortuna harbors ambitions of one day returning to Ryloth and ruling the planet.
Other Star Wars books and media have established that Fortuna is responsible for the presence of several of the creatures and characters in Jabba's palace during Return of the Jedi.
For example, the rancor that Jabba keeps underneath a trap door in his throne room was originally presented to him by Fortuna as a birthday gift.
Fortuna kidnaps Oola, the green-skinned Twi'lek female who appears in scenes in Return of the Jedi as a slave and dancer for Jabba.
After abducting her, Fortuna arranged for her to be trained in exotic dancing and told her stories about Jabba's palace that falsely portrayed it as a glamorous and exciting place, making Oola so eager to be there that she rejected opportunities to escape.
Fortuna also originally captured Salacious B. Crumb, a small creature that sat beside Jabba's tail on his throne and served as a court jester in the palace.
Crumb was a stowaway thief aboard Jabba's ship when Fortuna captured him and presented him to Jabba before the events of the film.

===
Return of the Jedi ===
Bib Fortuna makes his first appearance in Return of the Jedi (1983), the final film in the original Star Wars trilogy.
The film begins with Han Solo, one of the protagonists of the Star Wars franchise, being held captive by Jabba the Hutt and frozen in a slab of metal substance called carbonite.
Bib Fortuna is first seen in the film when he greets the droids C-3PO and R2-D2, who enter the palace to deliver a message to Jabba.
Fortuna greets them coldly at first, but becomes intrigued upon learning they have a gift for the Hutt.
He attempts to obtain more information about the gift, but the droids insist their instructions are to give it only to Jabba himself.
Fortuna brings the droids before Jabba, where they deliver a holographic message from the Jedi Knight Luke Skywalker seeking to bargain for the release of Han Solo.
Fortuna whispers advice into Jabba's ear and feeds him information as Jabba sits on his throne.
He is later present with Jabba when Princess Leia Organa, who infiltrated the palace by disguising herself as a bounty hunter named Boushh, is captured while freeing Han Solo from carbonite.
Jabba gives orders to Fortuna that Luke Skywalker is not to be admitted to the palace.
When Skywalker later arrived, Fortuna is among the first to intercept him and initially forbids him from speaking to Jabba.
However, Luke uses The Force to influence Fortuna's mind, convincing him to take Skywalker before Jabba.
When Jabba realizes Skywalker used a "Jedi mind trick" on Fortuna, he angrily scolds Fortuna and throws him off the throne room dais.
Fortuna later travels with Jabba aboard the Hutt's sail barge to the planned executions of Skywalker, Solo, and Solo's first mate Chewbacca at the Great Pit of Carkoon, where they are to be fed to a creature called a sarlacc.
A skirmish breaks out between Skywalker and his friends and Jabba's henchmen, resulting in the death of Jabba and the destruction of the sail barge.
The fate of Bib Fortuna following the events of Return of the Jedi is the same in the Expanded Universe/Star Wars Legends and the official Star Wars canon.
In the Star Wars Legends continuity, Fortuna survives the battle, escaping before the sail barge's destruction and returning to Jabba's palace to attempt to take over his criminal enterprise.
In the official canon, it’s the same.

===
The Phantom Menace ===
Bib Fortuna appears briefly in The Phantom Menace (1999), the first film in the Star Wars prequel trilogy.
He stands alongside Jabba the Hutt during the podrace, from which a young Anakin Skywalker emerges victorious.
At one point, Fortuna wakes up Jabba after the Hutt crime lord falls asleep during the podrace.
Since The Phantom Menace was set 32 years before the events of the first Star Wars film, Fortuna's presence establishes that he has been employed by Jabba the Hutt for more than three decades, dating back to the final years of the Galactic Republic.

===
The Mandalorian ===
In a post-credits scene in the eighth episode of the second season of The Mandalorian, a corpulent Bib Fortuna is depicted as the new owner of Jabba's palace.
During this time as owner he has put his own mark on the palace.
Including added his own humanoid  throne upon Jabba's old plinth, taken up having his own slave girl and endulged in eating fine foods and putting on weight.
He is killed by Boba Fett, who takes his throne.

===
Other Star Wars media ===


====
Legends canon ====
One of Bib Fortuna's first non-film appearances is in "
A Rancor Comes to Tatooine", a short story included in The Star Wars Sourcebook (1987).
The story describes the rivalry between Fortuna and a Corellian named Bidlo Kwerve, both of whom are competing to become Jabba the Hutt's majordomo in a period prior to Return of the Jedi.
Kwerve and Fortuna acquire the rancor as a birthday gift for Jabba, and Fortuna earns the majordomo job, while Kwerve is ultimately eaten by the rancor.
This storyline is expanded upon in Tales from Jabba's Palace, a 1995 anthology book written from the perspectives of multiple background characters in the Jabba's palace scenes of Return of the Jedi.
In the book, after Jabba receives the rancor gift, he offers Fortuna and Kwerve a choice of two rewards: one can become his majordomo, while the other will receive an unspecified "greater honor".
Sensing a trap, Fortuna accepts the majordomo position, thus saving his own life and ensuring Kwerve's death when the greater honor turns out to be the distinction of being the first person Jabba feeds to his new rancor.
Fortuna appears in several of the stories in Tales from Jabba's Palace, and the book establishes that Fortuna despises Jabba and is actively plotting to assassinate the Hutt, steal his wealth, and take over his criminal operation.
It also establishes Fortuna's personality as cunning and calculating, and that Fortuna's deferential attitude toward his employer is a facade.
Fortuna's back story is particularly expanded upon in the short story "Of the Day's Annoyances:
Bib Fortuna's Tale", by M. Shayne Bell.
In that story, Fortuna protects his friend Nat Secura, whom Jabba wants to kill by feeding him to the rancor.
Secura is the last descendant of a great Twi'lek house, and Fortuna uses Secura's power to sell other Twi'leks into slavery.
To protect Secura, Fortuna seeks assistance from his allies, the mysterious B'omarr monks, religious beings that have transplanted their brains into nutrient-filled jars attached to spider-like droid walkers.
Fortuna has the monks remove Secura's brain shortly before Secura's body, under Jabba's orders, is thrown to the rancor and eaten.
When Jabba is later killed on his sail barge by Princess Leia at the Great Pit of Carkoon, Fortuna watches the Hutt die and does nothing to prevent it.
Fortuna then flees on his private skiff and returns to Jabba's palace, where he expects to take over the criminal operation.
There, however, the monks decide the best fate for Fortuna is for his own brain to be transferred into one of their droid walkers, and they remove and transfer his brain against his will.
Fortuna appears in his disembodied droid walker form in a four-issue arc of the Star Wars: X-wing Rogue Squadron comic book entitled Battleground: Tatooine (1996).
In it, he is the captive of Firith Olan, a fellow Twi-lek criminal who Fortuna had called to Tatooine prior to the death of Jabba the Hutt.
Upon arriving and finding Fortuna's brain trapped in a droid walker, Olan begins operating his own criminal enterprise out of Jabba's palace, taking delight in mocking and torturing the helpless Fortuna.
After Olan becomes injured, Fortuna has his own consciousness transferred into Olan's body, leaving Olan's brain now trapped within the droid.
Afterward, Fortuna resumes his life of crime.
Fortuna is also one of the main characters in the comic book Star Wars: Jabba the Hutt: Betrayal (1996), which is set before Return of the Jedi.
In the comic, Fortuna plots a revolt among Jabba's slaves, with the intention of capturing Jabba and taking over his criminal enterprise.
The plot fails when it is interrupted by a separate assassination attempt against Jabba.
One of Fortuna's co-conspirators, a red-skinned alien named Nivek, nearly gives Fortuna's plot away in front of Jabba, but Fortuna shoots him in the head to silence him.
Fortuna appears in the 2000 video game Star Wars: Demolition, in which the player participates in vehicular combat contests at the behest of Jabba the Hutt.
Fortuna can be seen in the menu screen describing the various terrains the player could choose for the battles.
Fortuna is a playable character in the video games Lego Star Wars II:
The Original Trilogy (2006) and Lego Star Wars: The Complete Saga (2007).
He also appears in the webcomic Star Wars:
The Clone Wars: The Valsedian Operation, which was first published between 2010 and 2011.
In the comic, a group of Jedi including Anakin Skywalker, Obi-Wan Kenobi, and Ahsoka Tano investigate an illegal mining operation using slave labor in the Valsedian asteroid belt.
The Jedi are informed of it by Jabba the Hutt, who believes his distant cousin Torpo is running the operation.
However, upon investigation, the Jedi learn that the venture is secretly masterminded by Bib Fortuna.
Fortuna plays a supporting role in Smuggler's Gambit, a radio drama recorded live at Star Wars Celebration VI in Orlando, Florida in August 2012.
The story follows Han Solo, Chewbacca, and Princess Leia searching for a location for a new Rebel base following the events of the first Star Wars film.
After Solo and Chewbacca are captured and placed on sale at an auction, Fortuna attempts to buy them on behalf of Jabba the Hutt, entering into a bidding war with Prince Xizor of the Black Sun criminal organization.

====
Official canon ====
Fortuna appears in the mobile strategy game Star Wars Commander (2014), in which he becomes involved in a conflict with a mercenary named Saponza.
After Saponza kills multiple henchmen of Jabba the Hutt who had interfered with his property on Tatooine, Fortuna arranges for Saponza's home to be burned down.
Fortuna makes a brief appearance in the first issue of the Star Wars:
Darth Vader comic book series, released by Marvel Comics in February 2015.
In the comic, Darth Vader forcibly enters Jabba's palace to meet with the Hutt, and Fortuna briefly tries to stop him, but becomes frightened and allows him to pass after Vader threatens him with his lightsaber.
The scene mirrors that of Fortuna confronting Luke Skywalker as he enters the palace in Return of the Jedi, but establishes a direct contrast between Luke's non-aggressive behavior toward Fortuna and Vader's more threatening manner.
A Twi'lek character named Beezer Fortuna, a cousin of Bib Fortuna, appears in the Star Wars anthology film Rogue One (2016), which is set shortly before the events of the first Star Wars film.
Beezer's look is based upon preliminary sketches of Bib Fortuna from Return of the Jedi.
His nickname among Rogue One's crew during production was "Cousin Bib", so Lucasfilm executive Pablo Hidalgo made their familial connection official while writing Beezer's back story.
The character's first name derives from the "High Beeser of Hoth", a title belonging to Bib Fortuna in early Return of the Jedi drafts, but which was ultimately abandoned in later versions.
In Rogue One, Beezer is one of the chief strategists of an extremist rebel faction led by Saw Gerrera, and he can be seen in the group's hideout on the planet Jedha.
According to Beezer's back story, he resents his family's participation in the criminal underworld, and is more politically-minded than his other relatives.
The actor who portrayed Beezer Fortuna was fitted with contact lenses to make him more closely resemble Bib Fortuna.

== Characterization ==
Outwardly, Bib Fortuna appears very loyal and obedient to Jabba the Hutt, hardly ever leaving his side, and regularly supplying him with advice and counsel.
He demonstrates tremendous patience when dealing with Jabba's bad habits, enduring his mood swings, and occasionally violent outbursts.
Fortuna also employs this patience while dealing with Jabba's visitors, who range from drunken thugs to overbearing emissaries.
However, Star Wars media and works outside of the films have established that Fortuna's obedience and good manners toward Jabba are almost entirely an act, and that internally he serves his own interests and actively plots against his employer.
In reality, Fortuna feels a deep contempt for Jabba, as he reveals to his co-conspirators during a plot to kidnap and eventually assassinate the Hutt in the 1996 comic book Star Wars: Jabba the Hutt: Betrayal:
Hate?
What a tiny, insignificant, useless word.
What I feel for Jabba can only be expressed by causing every nerve in his body to experience the greatest possible pain for the longest possible time.
Every moment I spend in his company is an eternity of loathing.
The overpowering stench that pours from his open mouth, the sight of his thick, greasy, pustule-covered flesh.
His unspeakable acts of depravity...
he is the most revolting monster in the galaxy!

Fortuna is a powerful and dreaded individual in the galaxy's underground community, though also somewhat cowardly, and has a large capacity for cruelty and violence.
His sadism is on display in Return of the Jedi, where he looks forward to seeing Luke Skywalker and his friends get fed to the sarlacc.
Fortuna has a very vindictive personality, demonstrated by his attack against his home planet of Ryloth as an act of revenge for the death sentence he previously received there.
He often resorts to underhanded means to achieve his objectives, acting out against friends and foes alike.
This was exemplified by his willingness to kill one of his allies, the alien Nivek in Jabba
the Hutt:
Betrayal, when he risked exposing Fortuna's plot to assassinate Jabba.
Fortuna is cunning and manipulative, illustrated by the way in which he presents himself to Jabba as meek and passive in order to achieve his goals.
However, Skywalker's use of the Force to influence his mind in Return of the Jedi indicates Fortuna lacks a strong will, as Jedi mind tricks are more effective against weak-minded and susceptible individuals.
Michael Carter, the actor who portrayed Bib Fortuna in Return of the Jedi, said he found the character "stupid in an endearing way" and "quite innocent, yet quite scary", and believed he could have led a good life if he had been raised in a different place.

==
Concept and creation ==


===
Conception ===
Bib Fortuna was created by Lawrence Kasdan and George Lucas, co-writers of the Return of the Jedi screenplay.
In early drafts of the script, Fortuna was referred to by the title "High Beeser of Hoth", a reference to the planet Hoth, the ice planet that served as the home of a secret Rebel base in the Star Wars film The Empire Strikes Back.
Initially, the Return of the Jedi screenplay did not specify that Fortuna belonged to an alien species, but he was described in the final script as "a humanlike alien with long tentacles protruding from his skull".
Fortuna was designed by Phil Tippett, the visual effects artist who designed most of the creatures for Return of the Jedi.
Early sketches of the character were drawn by concept artists Nilo Rodis-Jamero, and Ralph McQuarrie.
Several of these sketches looked very different from Fortuna as he appeared in the final film.
For example, one of Rodis-Jamero's sketches portrayed Fortuna with a thin, cylindrical head with gills along the sides, and another with a flat-topped, triangularly-shaped head.
Those discarded sketches served as the basis for another Star Wars species called the Adnerem, which appear in the Star Wars: The Roleplaying Game and other later works.
Other variations by Rodis-Jamero presented Fortuna in blue, priest-like robes, occasionally holding a sceptre, with a lined, elongated face and narrow slits for eyes and nostrils.
McQuarrie's early sketches of Bib Fortuna were, in his words, "more human" than the final design.
He drew several versions with a variety of alien faces, as well as various costume elements like a tall top hat, and silver snow goggles, the latter of which George Lucas particularly enjoyed.
McQuarrie said his early Bib Fortuna sketches were among his favorite renderings from the entire Star Wars trilogy, though he said the final version was better and "weirder" than his early designs.
One of Rodis-Jamero's concepts was the one ultimately selected, and maquettes of the character were created by "Monster Shop" of Industrial Light & Magic, the motion picture visual effects company founded by Lucas.

=== Costume and makeup ===
Bib Fortuna's costume in Return of the Jedi was designed by Rodis-Jamero and Aggie Guerard Rodgers, and Nick Dudman worked as a makeup artist on the character.
Fortuna involved the first prosthetic makeup Dudman worked upon.
Michael Carter, the actor who portrayed Fortuna, spent three months undergoing extensive makeup casts and tests for the character at Elstree Studios before shooting began.
Molds were made from his hands and head.
Several foam appliances were sculpted to conform to Carter's face, and molds were made and cast into foam latex, which were then trimmed and carefully glued to the actor's face.
It took about eight-and-a-half hours to apply the makeup to Carter the first time, though the process was eventually reduced to slightly under an hour.
Carter had been told a great deal of makeup would be involved with the part, but he said: "I did not know what I was letting myself in for when it came to having to wear so much makeup.
It did come as a bit of a shock.
"Carter wore a large rubber headpiece, which included two large, slug-like tentacles that twisted around his neck.
Each tentacle was five feet long and draped ornamentally around Fortuna's shoulders.
The headpiece included a large waddle dangling underneath his chin, and large bulges above each of his eyes, which were intended to be sensory brain areas.
An intricate set of "air bladders", or foam and latex bubbles, were fitted onto Carter's temples and brows and inflated via hoses operated off-screen to give the impression of pulsation.
Once the headpiece was placed on, Carter had to wear it for the remainder of the shooting day, which was often difficult for the actor.
During one day, Carter had an itch for six hours that became so uncomfortable that Dudman split the headpiece down the middle
so Carter could scratch it.
After that point, the headpiece was specifically designed so it could be opened up the middle.
As Carter sweated due to the heat under the costume, the makeup would start to come loose and the glue would dissolve, requiring it to be constantly reapplied.
Carter wore dayglow orange contact lenses, which created a glowing effect for the character's eyes, something specifically requested by director Richard Marquand.
Carter felt they gave Bib Fortuna "a feminine look".
They were hard contact lenses, which covered the entire surface of Carter's eyeballs, except for holes drilled through the middles.
This gave him tunnel vision and severely limited his ability to see, and he kept accidentally walking into parts of the set as a result.
An optician was available for Carter at all times during filming to apply the lenses.
Carter said the contacts were made in "too much of a rush" and were too small, so he suffered abrasions of the cornea, slightly hindering his vision until about a week after filming ended.
Carter also wore sharp, pointed teeth, which were filed down to create what Tippett called a "ghastly focal point" for his dialogue scenes.
The teeth would occasionally slip out of Carter's mouth during shooting, at times striking against actors or crew members around him.
The teeth made it difficult for the actor to speak, and he had to strongly articulate Fortuna's lines to make the lip-movement look appropriate.
The character wore soft-soled shoes, meant to allow for silent movement.
Carter wore lifts on his feet to make himself taller, and props inside his costume made his arms appear longer.
Claws were placed on his fingertips, fitted through fingerless gloves that Tippett said gave Fortuna "a spidery reach".
Carter said the makeup had "an immediate effect" and once it was fully applied he would "kind of meditate it for a moment" because it ultimately helped dictate his performance.
However, he also said the large amount of makeup made acting more difficult, adding: "I was a big pile of moving rubber.
And when I wasn't moving, I was like a piece of furniture.
"
Due to strict security measures to prevent secrets of the film being leaked to the public, whenever Carter was brought outside to be moved to and from the set at Elstree Studios, he was covered with a dustbin liner so he would not be seen.
Carter would stand very still between takes to avoid disrupting the makeup, and occasionally crew members, seeing him standing among the various puppets and alien props, would believe he was a prop and attempt to lift him.
Makeup artist Shaune Harrison worked on the Bib Fortuna character in The Phantom Menace, as well as several other creatures and aliens in the film, including Jar Jar Binks.

===
Filming ===
It took five weeks to film Bib Fortuna's scenes for Return of the Jedi.
Michael Carter initially received little information about the character except that he was "an alien, and not a very nice one".
Due to the secrecy surrounding the film, Carter was only given the script pages that included his specific scenes.
He got them about four days before filming began, with all dialogue and information about other characters redacted.
Since Fortuna's dialogue was in an alien language, and since he had little knowledge about the rest of the film, Carter did not know anything about the storyline of Return of the Jedi during the filming process.
In order to realistically deliver dialogue in a fictional language, Carter would make up his own meaning for the words he was speaking, which made it easier for him to find the correct vocal delivery and facial expressions for the performance.
Carter was present from the very first day of shooting on January 11, 1982, which marked the final costume test on Stage 6 of Elstree Studios, in the set for the corridor of Jabba's palace.
The scenes in which Bib Fortuna and Luke Skywalker meet at the palace entrance were filmed on January 12 and 13.
During filming for Bib Fortuna's first chronological appearance in the film, when he first meets R2-D2 and C-3PO, Carter could not see the mark on the ground where he was supposed to stop due to the limited visibility caused by his contact lenses.
As a result, the crew set up a 2-by-4 piece of wood on the ground for him to stop his feet against.
During the first take of the shot, Carter tripped over the board and fell.
During another scene, Bib Fortuna lifts a captured Princess Leia and pushes her toward Jabba the Hutt, so he can lick her.
While filming the scene, Carter misjudged actress Carrie Fisher's weight, and lifted her so quickly that he nearly pushed her straight into the mouth of the Jabba puppet, causing her to scream.
Several scenes involving Fortuna were cut from Return of the Jedi, including one in which Salacious B. Crumb, the small creature that sits at the tail of Jabba the Hutt, vomits into Fortuna's beverage.
In another cut scene, Fortuna engages in a provocative dance with Jess, one of Jabba's dancers, who was portrayed by Amanda Noar.
George Lucas eliminated the scene because he felt it was inappropriate for children.
Another cut scene involved a longer exchange between Luke Skywalker and Fortuna after Skywalker first appeared at Jabba's palace.
In the original scene, the two had a long period of dialogue while walking down the corridor, with both actors speaking the fictional language of Huttese.
During one take, Carter had to shout at Skywalker, and his false teeth accidentally came out and hit actor Mark Hamill's face.
The scene was ultimately cut and a shorter scene with Fortuna and Skywalker speaking in a stairway was used instead.
During filming, both actors spoke in English, but Fortuna's dialogue was dubbed in Huttese later.

==
Portrayals ==


===
Michael Carter ===
The role of Bib Fortuna was cast very early in the production process for Return of the Jedi because makeup artist Stuart Freeborn wanted to get started on creating the character's look as quickly as possible.
Michael Carter came to the attention of Return of the Jedi casting director Mary Selway saw him perform in a musical in the West End theatre section of London in the early 1980s.
Director Richard Marquand had also seen and enjoyed Carter's theater work, and wanted to cast him as Fortuna; Marquand described him as a "terrific actor".
He was also drawn to Carter for the role because he wanted Fortuna to be very tall, and Carter was about six feet tall.
Marquand invited Carter to meet at a studio in Elstree Studios to discuss a role he was casting in a film, which Marquand would only identify by its fake working title Blue Harvest.
Carter was performing on a television series at the time.
Carter's train was late and Marquand was in a meeting when he arrived, and the front desk forgot to inform Marquand that he arrived, so Carter waited for an hour without being called in.
Marquand happened upon Carter as he was leaving for the day, and the meeting took place.
During the 30-minute meeting, Marquand informed him the part was an alien in a science-fiction film, also describing it as a children's film, and that Carter could have the role without auditioning if he wanted it, but Marquand could not discuss any details about the character or film because it was a "top secret Hollywood movie".
Carter was initially not sure the part interested him, but Marquand persisted, and Carter reluctantly agreed.
Only then did Marquand reveal that it was a Star Wars film.
Carter was sworn to secrecy about the role, but he told his family about the part anyway, and the next day his daughter discussed it publicly with a friend at her school.
Carter had never seen the original Star Wars film, and had only seen the sequel, The Empire Strikes Back, because he was working at the time in a theater production with Anthony Daniels, who played C-3PO in the film.
Following his appearance in Return of the Jedi, Carter was offered several alien roles or parts that involved heavy amounts of prosthetics.
For example, he was cast in the role of Radu Molasar, a monster and warlord in the Michael Mann film
The Keep (1983), as a direct result of his work in Return of the Jedi.
Carter has continued to receive letters and autograph requests from Star Wars fans for decades after the film's release, and he has made appearances at sci-fi and fantasy conventions.
Carter was offered the opportunity to reprise the role of Bib Fortuna in The Phantom Menace, but he declined due to the rigors associated with the makeup application.

===
Erik Bauersfeld ===
The voice of Bib Fortuna in Return of the Jedi was performed by Erik Bauersfeld, a radio dramatist who also voiced the alien character Admiral Ackbar in the film, and had unsuccessfully auditioned to voice Yoda in The Empire Strikes Back.
He was cast after Star Wars sound designer Ben Burtt approached him in 1983, while Bauersfeld was producing a radio drama with Lucasfilm sound designer Randy Thom and suggested he audition for the part of Ackbar.
The recording session for Fortuna's dialogue took about 30 minutes, and Bauersfeld made up the voice on the spot after looking at a photograph of Fortuna, without having any other information about the character.
Since Fortuna spoke in the Huttese alien language, Bauersfeld had no idea what the character was saying when he recited the lines.
He said of the process: "Ben (Burtt) gave me a general idea
and I just did it.
"Bauersfeld did not receive an on-screen credit for his roles as Fortuna or Ackbar, and his association with the characters was unknown for years after the film was released.
Michael Carter did not know another actor's voice was used,
as late as 2004 he believed it was his own voice, saying in an interview: "It sounded like my voice."
Eventually fans learned Bauersfeld played the parts
and he began to receive multiple fan letters every week, which continued for the rest of his life.
Bauersfeld said he appreciated the passion of fans and responded to every autograph request, but that he was not particularly knowledgeable about Star Wars himself; in 2011 interview, he said he had not seen Return of the Jedi since it first came out, still had not seen the first Star Wars film, and knew no details about Fortuna, asking the interviewer: "He was the bad guy, wasn't he?"
===
Matthew Wood ===
Matthew Wood, a sound editor who has worked on multiple Star Wars films, portrayed Fortuna in the podrace scenes in The Phantom Menace, which marked his first acting role.
Wood has also provided the voices of General Grievous, Ello Asty, battle droids, and various other minor Star Wars characters.
Wood was offered the part after George Lucas saw him in a doorway during a meeting and felt he looked right for the part.
According to Wood, Lucas told him "You're kind of skinny and creepy" before offering him the part and sending him to wardrobe to be fitted with prosthetics.
Although in the scene Fortuna appears alongside Jabba and several other characters inside a private booth, Wood was alone when his scenes were filmed, and his footage was digitally combined with footage of the other characters later in post-production.
Wood interacted with a light stand during filming, which was later replaced by a visual effect creating Jabba.
The moment when Wood woke up a sleeping Jabba at the end of the podrace was a joke conceived by the motion picture visual effects company Industrial Light & Magic during the making of the film, which George Lucas loved.
Wood reprised the role of Fortuna in the Smuggler's Gambit radio drama, recorded live at Star Wars Celebration VI in Orlando in August 2012.
This time he provided the voice for the character, something he did not do in the film.
Wood reprised the role for the season two finale of The Mandalorian.
===
Other portrayals ===
Bib Fortuna was voiced by David Dukes in the radio dramitization of Return of the Jedi released in 1996 by Highbridge Audio.
Alan Ruscoe, who portrayed the Jedi master Plo Koon and the Neimoidian captain Daultay Dofine in The Phantom Menace, also portrayed Fortuna in a scene before the Galactic Senate, but it was ultimately cut from the final film.

==
Cultural impact ==


===
Critical reception ===
The name and first photo of Bib Fortuna were first revealed to the public in a Return of the Jedi poster book published by Paradise Press in May 1983, the first of four such magazines released in advance of the film.
In his 1983 review of Return of the Jedi, Desmond Ryan of The Philadelphia Inquirer cited Fortuna as one of the diverse types of alien species in the film that "reaffirms the inventiveness and inspiration of Lucas and his legions of craftsmen and technicians".
Ryan also said Fortuna "looks like David Bowie with a large bratwurst sausage growing out of his ear".
Fortuna was ranked No.
25 on Rolling Stone's list of the 50 best Star Wars characters, and was also included among The Daily Telegraph's list of the best characters from the franchise.
CNET writer Sam Stone called Fortuna "one of the most memorable" characters and alien races from Return of the Jedi and described him as "a fan-favorite character".
Star Wars Insider writer Calum Waddell described Bib Fortuna as "one of the standout supporting characters" of Return of the Jedi.
Scott Chernoff of Star Wars Insider said Michael Carter conveyed "a touching vulnerability through his makeup and contact lenses, transforming what could have been a stock character into a sadly haunting figure".
Fortuna's line "De wanna wanga", which he speaks upon first meeting C-3PO and R2-D2 in Return of the Jedi, has become a well-known line of Star Wars dialogue.
Michael Carter has noted the character he portrayed became far more famous than the actor himself, joking: "Bib Fortuna's very famous; I'm hardly known within my own family."
Daniel Mallory Ortberg, an author and editor who has written a Star Wars short story for the anthology book From a Certain Point of View (2017), has said Tales from Jabba's Palace and reading the back story of Bib Fortuna and other characters was one of the first times the franchise strongly resonated with him.
Comedian and actor Nick Swardson called Bib Fortuna one of his favorite Star Wars characters.

===
Merchandise ===
An action figure of Bib Fortuna was released by Kenner Products in 1983, coinciding with the release of Return of the Jedi.
The toy was distributed in Europe by the company Palitoy.
The action figure came with a miniature staff, and Fortuna wears a brown cloak in most versions, but five known prototypes exist in which he wears a white cloak, and they are considered among the most rare and valuable Star Wars toys.
Several other Bib Fortuna products were released in 1983, including an eraser by Butterfly Originals, and a cookie by Pepperidge Farm.
A Bib Fortuna toy was released in 1993 as part of the Star Wars Bend-Ems line by JusToys, a collection of rubber figures that could be easily bent and twisted.
In 1996, Bib Fortuna was one of the Star Wars characters to receive its own Micro Machines mini-transforming playsets by Galoob.
The toy line included miniature versions of the head of each character, which opened to reveal a small set from the film and a figurine of the character itself.
The Fortuna playset was sold as part of a collection that also included an Imperial Scout Trooper and Figrin D'an, one of the Mos Eisley Cantina band members.
Fortuna was also included in a Micro Machines playset of the planet Tatooine, which included both Jabba's palace and the Great Pit of Carkoon.
A Bib Fortuna action figure was released in 1997 as part of Kenner's The Power Of The Force toy line, as part of the 20th anniversary of the release of the first Star Wars film.
The toy came with a small gun described as a "black hold-out blaster".
Also in 1997, Kenner released a two-pack of 12-inch figures of Fortuna and Luke Skywalker.
A ceramic mug of Fortuna was released in 1996 as part of the Star Wars Classic Collectors Series Figural Mug line by the toy company Applause.
Between 1997 and 1999, the Japanese company JAP Inc. created a series of large silver sculpted Star Wars rings from the various Star Wars characters, including Bib Fortuna.
A Lego figurine of Bib Fortuna was created and released as part of multiple Lego Star Wars toy sets, including one of the front gate of Jabba's palace released in 2003, and another of the interior of the palace released in 2012.
Fortuna was one of 55 Star Wars skins released in November 2014 for the Xbox 360 and
Xbox One versions of the video game Minecraft.
A Funko Pop figurine of Fortuna was released in 2015.
In 2017, the company Gentle Giant made a limited run of 750 miniature busts of Bib Fortuna, utilized 3-D technology to create a 1:6-scale replica of the character.
An auction was held by the Dallas-based Heritage Auctions in August 2018 for a collection of 33 rare Star Wars action figures that were expected to sell for about $360,000.
The collection, which was sold by an anonymous collector from Dubai, included one of the five known original prototypes of Fortuna's action figure, which alone was expected to sell for about $30,000.
The 1980s master model of the Bib Fortuna toy by Kenner Products was sold at the Thornaby-based Vectis Auctions for £36,000 in April 2019.
It had an estimated value of £12,000 before the auction, but sold for the highest amount of any of the Star Wars prototypes auctioned, including an Emperor's Royal Guard that sold for £28,800 and Ewok named Logray that sold for £12,000.
The models were saved by a Palitoy tooling manager who had kept them following the release of the figures.
A rare encapsulated Bib Fortuna action figure included in an auction in Pennsylvania in November 2019 was expected to seek between $10,000 and $75,000.

==
References ==


===
Footnotes ===


===
Bibliography ===


==
External links ==
Bib Fortuna in the StarWars.com Databank
Bib Fortuna on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki

}}
Kuiil is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise who first appeared in the Disney+ television series The Mandalorian.
An alien of the Ugnaught species, Kuiil is a former indentured servant of the Galactic Empire living in solitude when he encounters the show's title character and assists him in seeking and protecting a young alien known as "The Child".

Kuiil is portrayed as wise, patient, and hard-working, with a high level of mechanical skills and a gruff but ultimately kind-hearted personality.
The voice of Kuiil was performed by Nick Nolte, who completed his recordings for all the character's dialogue in a single afternoon.
Kuiil's performance was done by Misty Rosas, who during filming wore an animatronic face mask created by Legacy Effects.

Kuiil's face was brought to life through animatronics and puppetry, with its electronics and wires concealed in the backpack and pockets of Kuiil's costume.
Three puppeteers controlled the mask's mouth and eyebrows off-camera as Rosas performed her scenes, attempting to match the character's facial movements to Nolte's vocal tracks.
The process often proved challenging, particularly when the puppeteers missed signals made by Rosas during dimly-lit scenes.

Kuiil's dynamic with the bounty hunter droid IG-11 reflects a parenting theme prevalent among multiple characters throughout the first season of The Mandalorian, and Kuiil's reprogramming of the droid from hunter to protector drew nature versus nurture discussions among reviewers.
Kuiil has been received positively by reviewers and fans alike.
He has been described as a fan favorite, with several reviews calling him the best character on the show, and his signature line "I have spoken" became one of the better-known and best-liked lines of dialogue from the series.

== Appearances ==
Kuiil is an alien of the Ugnaught species.
According to his backstory established in exposition dialogue on The Mandalorian, Kuiil was sold into indentured servitude to the Galactic Empire and spent many years working for them against his will prior to the events of the television series.
At one point in the show, Kuiil says he worked in the gene farms of a cloning facility during his time with the Empire.
He eventually worked hard enough to pay off his debt and earn his freedom, and then sought a reclusive home on a quiet world where he would no longer have to work for anyone else again.
Kuiil appeared in three episodes in the first season of The Mandalorian, making his first appearance in the series debut episode "Chapter 1:
The Mandalorian", where he is shown living on a moisture farm on the planet Arvala-7, working as a vapor farmer.
In that episode, Kuiil encounters the show's title character, a bounty hunter known as the Mandalorian, who is seeking to collect a bounty on an unnamed person being held on the planet.
Kuiil assists the Mandalorian when he is attacked by creatures known as blurrgs.
He welcomes the Mandalorian into his home, where Kuiil informs him that several other bounty hunters and mercenaries have passed through Arvala-7 in search of the Mandalorian's target.
Kuiil offers to help the bounty hunter travel to the compound where the asset is being kept, with the hope that once the bounty has been collected, peace will once again be restored to Arvala-7.
Kuiil teaches the Mandalorian how to ride one of the captured blurrgs so he can travel to the compound.
Kuiil appears in the next episode, "Chapter 2:
The Child, when the Mandalorian returns to him with the target he had been seeking: a young alien creature referred to as "The Child".
Kuiil helps the Mandalorian avert a crisis with a group of alien scavengers called Jawas.
After the Jawas steal necessary parts from the Mandalorian's ship, the Razor Crest, Kuiil helps arranges a trade meeting between them, which Kuiil assures the Mandalorian is the best way to regain the necessary parts to repair his ship.
Kuiil helps foster a deal in which the Jawas will return the parts if the Mandalorian collects for them an egg from a dangerous nearby creature called a mudhorn, which the Mandalorian does.
After collecting the parts, Kuiil spends several days helping the Mandalorian repair the Razor Crest.
Afterward, the Mandalorian offers to share some of the reward he will receive for collecting the bounty on the Child, but Kuiil refuses.
The Mandalorian also offers for Kuiil to accompany him off-planet and work for him, but Kuiil declines this request as well, preferring his peaceful life on Arvala-7, and wishing to never work for anyone else ever again due to his past with the Empire.
Kuiil reappears in the show's penultimate episode, "Chapter 7:
The Reckoning, in which the Mandalorian returns to Arvala-7 with his ally Cara Dune.
They seek Kuiil's help in protecting the Child during a mission on the planet Nevarro to eliminate an Imperial presence there.
It is revealed that after the Mandalorian left Arvala-7, Kuiil found and rebuilt the bounty hunter droid IG-11, whom the Mandalorian had destroyed while rescuing the Child.
After a lengthy process of retraining IG-11 to walk and operate again, Kuiil reprogrammed him to be a nurse droid and protector, rather than a hunter.
Kuiil assigns IG-11 to protect the Child, and agrees to accompany the Mandalorian to help protect the Child from imperial slavery, under the condition that he bring along IG-11 and his blurrgs.
On their way to the planet, Kuiil witnesses the Child use the Force to choke Cara after mistaking her for a threat.
While the others in the party do not understand his power, Kuiil advises them about rumors he has heard about the Force.
During their journey on Nevarro, Cara and the Mandalorian's party are attacked by a group of giant winged creatures, which they repel after losing several of the blurrgs.
Later, experiencing a change of heart after the Child saves his life, the bounty hunter Greef Karga reveals the mission is an ambush, after which the Mandalorian is to be killed and the Child given over to the Imperials.
Cara, the Mandalorian, and Greef instead devise a new plan: they will leave the Child behind, bring the Mandalorian to the Imperials as if he is a prisoner, and then eliminate them.
At the Mandalorian's request, Kuiil agrees to take the Child back to the Razor Crest on his blurrg while the Mandalorian, Cara, and Greef attempt to eliminate the Imperials.
When Imperial leader Moff Gideon later traps the Mandalorian and his party, the bounty hunter contacts Kuiil and urges him hurry back to the ship and lock it down for the Child's protection, but two Imperial Scout Troopers on speeder bikes intercept the message and rush to stop Kuiil.
Kuiil rides his blurrg as fast as possible and nearly reaches the Razor Crest, but he is shot and killed by the troopers, who then take the Child.
In the season finale "Chapter 8: Redemption", Kuiil is not seen, but
the Mandalorian returns to bury him, creating a makeshift tombstone with Kuiil's helmet resting atop a bed of rocks.

== Characterization ==
Kuiil values the peace and tranquility he has established on Arvala-7, as shown by his willingness to assist the Mandalorian and other bounty hunters travel in finding the bounty they seek.
He believes doing so will help maintain the peace, and that getting the asset off the planet will restore tranquility to Arvala-7.
Kuiil's history of servitude to the Empire means he strongly values his freedom and independence, and he has no desire to work for anyone again other than himself, as demonstrated by his rejection of the Mandalorian's offer of employment.
Kuill has worked hard to get away from his past and forge a new life for himself.
Corey Plante of Inverse wrote: "There’s something admirable about Kuiil's values here.
He's a humble, salt-of-the-earth character who doesn’t bother contemplating any sense of morality; he knows what he wants out of life, and every choice he makes furthers that end.
"
However, although Kuiil tries to avoid conflict at all costs, he does not hesitate to help those in need.
He has a strong sense of honor, and believes in doing the right thing, as illustrated by his willingness to risk his safety and hard-won freedom to help the Child.
The value he places on freedom due to his past experience factors into his determination to protect the Child from the Empire.
Kuiil speaks directly and without hesitation, using few words and often cutting off any further argument or response by stating: "I have spoken."
Actress Misty Rosas, who delivered the performance of Kuiil, said she does not believe the line is meant to be arrogant or disrespectful, but rather speaks to Kuiil's philosophy on life: "He just simplifies everything in life, and is just like: '
I have spoken.
You know, we're done talking about this.
Don't complicate it, don't overthink it.'
"
Nevertheless, Kuiil's terse manner of speaking has resulted in reviewers describing him as both friendly, and grumpy, though he is ultimately kind-hearted beneath his sometimes rough exterior.
as demonstrated by the compassion he shows for both IG-11 and the Child.
Plante wrote: "He comes across as deeply rational and admirable, even if many people might mistake him for a bit of a jerk.
"Kuiil is extremely hard-working, with a high level of mechanical skills, and craftsmanship.
He is very resourceful, and highly proficient with technology, as demonstrated by his ability to repair IG-11 and the Razor Crest.
Kuiil is very intelligent, offering wisdom and guidance to visitors on Arvala-7.
He has lived a long time, and has seen and experienced many terrible things as a result of his past as an indentured servant, instilling a hardened world-weariness in him.
Cautious, stoic, and patient, Kuiil presents a calm and composed temperament even in the face of the Mandalorian's occasional impatience.
Kuiil is also a teacher, as he shows when he teaches the Mandalorian how to ride a blurrg, and teaches IG-11 how to walk and operate again following his reprogramming.
This shows Kuiil's penchant for patience and affirmation, which Megan Crouse of Den of Geek writes is "the core of his character and part of what makes him so delightful".
His patience is further demonstrated by his willingness to spend multiple days helping the Mandalorian repair his ship.
Although the Mandalorian has trouble trusting anybody throughout the series, Kuiil earns his trust.
Like all Ugnaughts, Kuiil has pink skin, white hair, upturned noses, and thick layers of jowls.
He has a low, guttural voice that at times sounds like a raspy growl.

==
Concept and creation ==


===
Conception ===
Kuiil was created as an original character for The Mandalorian, a live-action Star Wars television series that debuted on the Disney+ streaming service on November 12, 2019.
Concept art was prepared for the character during pre-production, including an image by Christian Alzmann of Kuiil and the Mandalorian riding bluurgs alongside each other, and another by Jama Jurabaev of Kuiil and the Mandalorian at his moisture farm.
Ugnaughts had first appeared in The Empire Strikes
Back (1980)
as workers on Cloud City, and reappeared in the sequel film Return of the Jedi (1983).
They have also been featured on the television shows Star Wars:
The Clone Wars, Star Wars Rebels, and Star Wars Resistance, as well as various Star Wars novels.
The character of Kuiil was first publicly announced on October 28 with the release of a character poster of The Mandalorian solely featuring the character.
The first footage of Kuiil was shown in a trailer for The Mandalorian released on November 6, 2019, less than a week before the show debuted.
The trailer included a brief clip of Kuiil, as well as a small amount of dialogue from the forthcoming show, in which he said he has never met a Mandalorian before, but has heard stories about them.

===
Portrayals ===
The voice of Kuiil was performed by veteran actor Nick Nolte.
Nolte was seriously considered for the role of Han Solo in the original Star Wars (1977) film, losing out to Harrison Ford.
In a 2011 interview, eight years before the release of The Mandalorian, Nolte said he would have been "kind of a goofy Star Wars guy" if he had been cast.
Nolte completed his vocal performances for all of Kuiil's dialogue in The Mandalorian in a single afternoon session over the course of multiple hours.
Although the news had leaked on the internet earlier, Nolte's casting was officially announced on November 30, 2018, though the character he would be portraying was not initially revealed.
He was the third cast member publicly confirmed for the series, after Pedro Pascal and Gina Carano.
Actress and stuntwoman Misty Rosas provided the physical performance for Kuiil, calling it "the most amazing job of my life".
Rosas had a cold reading audition for the part in the summer of 2018, though she arranged via her agent to come in early and briefly review the script and familiarize herself with the material.
Rosas, who was born with 65% hearing loss in her right ear, was having problems with her hearing at the time and had an appointment with an ear doctor just hours before the audition.
She was nervous that these problems would negatively impact her audition and that she would be forced to read lips, which she fears would "[take her] out of the scene".
Among the dialogue Rosas recited during her audition was Kuiil's signature line, "I have spoken", and she believed the producers studied her delivery of this line to gauge her understanding of the character.
Rosas felt an immediate connection with the character based on her own life experiences, saying: "I know what it is to fight for your freedom."
Rosas also said she related to character's wise and thoughtful personality due to her regular practice of yoga.

===
Costume ===
Kuiil's face was brought to life through the use of animatronics and puppetry, with a head mask that was created by Legacy Effects, a shop of prosthetic makeup experts started by Stan Winston.
The face itself was a foam latex mask that Rosas also wore for the part.
The mouth and eyebrows were controlled by three puppeteers off-camera as Misty Rosas delivered her performances.
The electronics from the face mask's animatronics were concealed inside a backpack Kuiil wears throughout the show, and concealed wires ran along the back of Rosas' neck from the backpack into the mask.
The wires were spread apart to give Rosas the greatest possible freedom of motion.
Batteries for the mask were concealed inside the pockets of Kuiil's costume.
As a result of all the machinery, the mask was physically heavy and placed a great deal of pressure on Rosas' shoulder, neck, back, and core stability.
However, Rosas said the weight of the costume ultimately aided her performance, since it helped her portray Kuiil's advanced age and slow walking speed.
Kuiil's eyes are not part of the mask, and instead, Rosas' actual eyes with contacts are visible.
Unlike some costumes Rosas has worn in past performances, she was able to see clearly while filming, but it was occasionally difficult to breathe because her mouth was far back within the mask.
She occasionally needed to ask crew members to open the mouth of the mask for her between takes
so she could breathe more freely.
Some reviewers have noted that Kuiil's mask appears to have been designed to resemble Nick Nolte's face.

===
Filming ===
Before scenes involving Kuiil were filmed, the cast and crew of The Mandalorian held private rehearsals with actress Misty Rosas in which she did not wear the costume.
Jon Favreau, creator and showrunner of the series, attended these rehearsals, in which they would attempt to determine the rhythm and timing of each scene.
Rosas called the rehearsals "the most nerve-wracking for me".
Nick Nolte recorded dialogue for Kuiil before the character's live-action scenes were filmed, providing multiple takes with different performances and vocal inclinations for the crew to choose from.
Rosas felt Nolte's voice work for Kuiil was "beautiful".
The recordings would not be available until the mornings of filming, so Rosas prepared a great deal in advance for her scenes, studying the dialogue carefully, so that shooting would go as smoothly as possible.
Once the dialogue was ready, Rosas and other members of the crew, including the episode's director, would listen to the various recordings, arrange the chosen recordings, and prepare to shoot the scenes.
It was complicated and often difficult for the puppeteers to match Kuiil's facial movements to Nolte's vocal tracks during filming; Misty said of the process: "We were so proud
and we wanted it so bad, so we really, really focused and worked really hard.
"
Scenes with large amount of dialogue from Kuiil were particularly difficult.
Rosas and the puppeteers prepared extensively to ensure their efforts were coordinated, and during filming she would provide them a non-verbal signal to indicate when she was about to act out a line of dialogue so they could operate the mask.
Occasionally the puppeteers would miss her signals, particularly during scenes that were dimly lit, and multiple takes were necessary as a result.
Kuiil often holds the Child during his scenes in "Chapter 7:
The Reckoning", which is a puppet prop filled with animatronics.
This made the Child relatively heavy, which occasionally proved challenging for Rosas, who also had to manage the weight of the animatronics in her own costume.
One full day of filming the episode focused upon Kuiil riding the blurrg, a process Rosas described as "intense" due to the amount of time she spent on the fake creature and the speeds at which it was made to appear to run.
The process was made further challenging because she was carrying the heavy animatronic Child prop throughout the scenes, and she occasionally needed breaks between takes.
Rosas said: "My legs are not exactly long, so I was squeezing for dear life and holding the baby."
However, Rosas was able to place the weight of her animatronics-filled backpack on the saddle of the blurrg while filming the scenes, which helped relieve pressure on her shoulders, neck, and back.
While the closing credits music for The Mandalorian is usually fairly upbeat, a slower and sadder composition was used for "Chapter 7:
The Reckoning" because the credits immediately followed Kuiil's death in the final scene.

==
Themes ==
The dynamic between Kuiil and IG-11 reflect a childrearing theme that is prevalent among multiple characters throughout the first season of The Mandalorian.
The two have a relationship similar to that of a father and son, as demonstrated in the scene in which Kuiil teaches IG-11 how to operate and function after the droid is reprogrammed.
This dynamic is similar to the one shared by the Mandalorian and the child throughout the season.
The Kuiil and IG-11 scenes also demonstrate that the way in which the "child" character is raised makes a significant difference in whether the child becomes an asset or a threat to those around him.
The droid was a dangerous assassin before Kuiil reprogrammed him, but thanks to the Ugnaught's parenting, he becomes a protector and helper instead.
This, too, is similar to the relationship between the Mandalorian and the Child.
For example, the scene in which the Child uses the Force to choke Cara Dune shows that the Child has the potential for evil if he is not properly guided by his "parent".
Kuiil's reprogramming of IG-11 raises nature versus nurture themes in The Mandalorian.
Even after IG-11 is reprogrammed, the Mandalorian does not believe he has truly changed, because he believes droids have an essential nature and that IG-11's nature remains murderous and untrustworthy.
But in reprogramming IG-11, Kuiil nurtures him and helps him to change; Kuiil feels that in the process of learning how to function again, IG-11 gained a new personality.
Kuiil insists to the Mandalorian: "Droids are not good or bad — they are neutral reflections of those who program them."
Keith Phipps of Vulture wrote of IG-11 and the nature versus nurture theme: "He's not bad.
He's just programmed that way, and with care and change he can do a lot of good in the world.
"Additionally, Leo Holman of Comic Book Resources said the character of Kuiil raises questions about the Galactic Empire that have never before been considered in Star Wars.
The fact that Kuiil had been an indentured servant for the Empire invites the question of whether this is a prevalent type of Imperial practice: "It makes you wonder, how many of the characters we see in the background working for the Empire in various other Star Wars movies and media, are there against their will working towards freedom?"
Additionally, the fact that Kuiil ultimately pays off his debt and buys his freedom raises the further question about whether species enslaved by the Empire can eventually earn their freedom through hard work, a concept that had never been featured in any other Star Wars media before The Mandalorian.

==
Cultural impact ==


===
Critical reception ===
Kuiil has been received positively by reviewers and fans alike.
He has been described as a fan favorite, and several reviews have called him the best character on the show.
His line "I have spoken" became one of the better-known and best-liked lines of dialogue from the series, and has been the subject of internet memes used by fans.
Screen Rant Writer Kiki Evans called it one of the "most iconic phrases" from the series.
Leo Holman of Comic Book Resources declared Kuiil The Mandalorian's best character, writing: "At first glance, [Kuiil] seemed like a throwaway character, but with every line of dialogue the character spoke, he became more and more interesting and helped shine a light on parts of the Star Wars universe that have never been explored."
Charlie Ridgely of Comicbook.com described Kuiil as "one of the most memorable additions to the Star Wars canon in recent years".
Space.com writer Scott Snowden called Kuiil one of the best characters on the show, describing him as quirky, interesting, and "beautifully portrayed", and particularly praising the level of detail and animatronic control in his facial expressions.
Corey Plante of Inverse called Kuiil "the best and most under-appreciated character" on the show, and said that he felt the choice to make a member of a little-known Star Wars species such an important element of the show made the franchise feel larger and richer.
He wrote: "Star Wars is better because Kuiil exists.
"Mustafa
Gatollari of Distractify called Kuiil one of the best parts of The Mandalorian, and praised the show for implementing the Ugnaught species, a previously minor element of Star Wars, in such an effective way.
Q.V. Hough of Screen Rant described Kuiil's character arc as "heroic" and said the character is "bound to be remembered by fans as one of the season's best characters".
Den of Geek writer Megan Crouse said that she felt the character was a wise old mentor trope, but that this worked well, in part due to Kuiil's likeable personality and the strong performances of Nolte and Rosas.
Crouse wrote: "He's the Obi-Wan Kenobi, and, right now, that's okay."
Noah Howell of Niner Times called Kuiil his favorite character on the show, saying his humble and unassuming nature "instantly made me fall in love with him".
He compared the dynamic of Kuill and the Mandalorian to that of Luke Skywalker and Yoda in the original Star Wars trilogy.
Ana Dumaraog felt Kuiil's death was unfortunate, but well-handled by the show.
Forbes writer Erik Kain liked that Kuiil was not abandoned after his initial episodes and instead returned to play a major part in the final episodes of the season.
Mike Hale of The New York Times said Nick Nolte provided a "nicely acerbic voice" for the character.
Screen Rant ranked Kuiil seventh on its list of the best characters from the first season of The Mandalorian, and fifth on a separate list of the most interesting characters from the season.
When Kuiil was killed in "Chapter 7:
The Reckoning", the episode ended on a shot of his unconscious body.
Fans on the internet expressed hope that it would be revealed in the next episode that he had survived, or that IG-11 or another character would revive him, before his death was confirmed on-screen.
Some fans have speculated that the Mandalorian may eventually give the Child the name Kuiil in memory of the Ugnaught.

===
Merchandise ===
A Funko Pop figurine of Kuiil was announced on December 31, 2019.

==
References ==


===
Citations ===


===
Works cited ===
Rosas, Misty; Ballance, Brian (January 21, 2020).
"
Ep.
108 Misty Rosas" (Podcast).
The Interesting Podcast.
Retrieved January 22, 2020.

==
External links ==
Kuiil in the StarWars.com Databank
Kuiil on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Yoda () is a fictional character in the Star Wars universe, first appearing in the 1980 film The Empire Strikes Back.
He is a small, green humanoid alien who is powerful with the Force and served as Grandmaster of the Jedi Order.
In The Empire Stikes Back, Yoda was voiced and puppeteered by Frank Oz, who reprised the role in Return of the Jedi, the prequel trilogy, and the sequel trilogy.
Outside of the films, the character has been mainly voiced by Tom Kane, starting with the 2003 Clone Wars animated television series.
Yoda has since become an iconic figue in popular culture due to his distinct pattern of speech and role as a wise mentor.

In his first appearance in the original trilogy, Yoda is described as the mentor of Obi-Wan Kenobi, and lives in exile on the swamp planet of Dagobah.
He trains Luke Skywalker in the ways of the Force until his death at the age of 900 in Return of the Jedi, though he later returns as a Force spirit.
In the prequel trilogy, Yoda leads the Jedi High Council and trains the young generations of Jedi until they are assigned to a master.
When the Clone Wars breaks out, he becomes a general in the Galactic Republic's army and leads several legions of clone troopers.
Yoda is one of the few Jedi to survive the events of Order 66 at the end of the war, and faces off against Darth Sidious, but is outmatched and forced to go into hiding.
Yoda's spirit appears again in the sequel trilogy, advising an older Luke and empowering Rey to face a revived Darth Sidious.

==
Concept and creation ==
Frank Oz provided Yoda's voice in each film and performed as lead puppeteer in the original trilogy, Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace and Star Wars: The Last Jedi, as well as appearing for a vocal cameo in Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker.
For some walking scenes in The Empire Strikes Back and The Phantom Menace, dwarf actors Deep Roy and Warwick Davis appeared in costume as Yoda (though neither was credited).
While Frank Oz served as the primary performer, over the years he had been assisted by a multitude of other puppeteers, including: Kathryn Mullen (Ep.
V), Wendy Froud (Ep.
V), David Barclay (Ep.
V-VI), Mike Quinn (Ep.
VI), David Greenaway (Ep.
I & VI), Don Austen
(Ep.
I), Kathy Smee (Ep.
I), Dave Chapman (Ep.
VIII), Damian Farrell (Ep.
VIII), and Colin Purves (Ep.
VIII).
For the radio dramatizations of The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi, Yoda was voiced by John Lithgow while Tom Kane voiced him in the Clone Wars animated series and several video games.

The make-up artist Stuart Freeborn based Yoda's face on his own and Albert Einstein's.
In The Phantom Menace, he was redesigned to look younger.
He was computer-generated for two distant shots but remained mostly a puppet.
The puppet was re-designed by Nick Dudman from Stuart Freeborn's original design.

Rendered with computer animation in Star Wars:
Episode II – Attack of the Clones and Star Wars: Episode III – Revenge of the Sith, Yoda appeared in ways not previously possible, including his participation in elaborate fight scenes.
In Revenge of the Sith, his face appears in several big close-ups, demanding highly detailed CGI work.
His performance was deliberately designed to be consistent with the limitations of the puppet version, with some "mistakes" made such as the occasional ear-jiggling.
Rob Coleman was responsible for the character's new incarnation to the series.

Yoda was recreated in CGI for the 2011 Blu-ray release of The Phantom Menace.
A clip of the new CG Yoda from The Phantom Menace was first seen in the featurette The Chosen One, included in the 2005 DVD release of Revenge of the Sith.
The 2012 theatrical 3D release of The Phantom Menace also features the CG version of Yoda.

Series creator George Lucas has stated that he originally had Obi-Wan training Luke, but decided that it would not make sense to have him standing around watching Luke
do all the fighting in the films and not help him, so he killed him off in the first film.
He then created a new character, Yoda, to have someone train Luke.

===
Character overview ===
Grand Master Yoda is among the oldest, most stoic, and most powerful Jedi Masters in the Star Wars universe.
George Lucas opted to have many details of the character's life history remain unknown.
Yoda's race and home world have not been named in any official media, canonical or otherwise, and he is merely said to be of a "species unknown" by the Star Wars Databank.
Yoda's characteristic speech patterns were conceived by Lucas and Lawrence Kasdan, and developed by Oz.
Academic syntacticians have found them somewhat inconsistent, but have extrapolated that they possess object–subject–verb word order, making them anastrophic.

The films and Expanded Universe reveal that Yoda had a hand in training almost every Jedi Master in the galaxy.
In the Star Wars prequel films, he instructs several younglings in the Jedi Temple before they are assigned to a master.
In The Empire Strikes Back
he mentions that he had been training Jedi "for 800 years", which means he must have been a Master Jedi for quite some time before that.

===
Other members of species ===
Two other members of Yoda's unnamed alien species are known in current Star Wars canon:
Yaddle (who appears as a background female character in the prequel
trilogy film Star Wars Episode
I: The Phantom Menace as a Jedi master) and the character in The Mandalorian named Grogu (called "Baby Yoda" by fans and media).
Their respective relation (if any) to Yoda is unknown.

==
Appearances ==


===
Original trilogy ===


====
The Empire Strikes Back (1980)
====
Yoda makes his first film appearance in The Empire Strikes Back.
Luke Skywalker (Mark Hamill) arrives on Dagobah to seek his guidance, having been instructed to do so by the Force ghost of Obi-Wan Kenobi (Alec Guinness), who describes him as "the Jedi Master who instructed me."

Yoda does not initially identify himself to Luke and instead tests his patience by presenting himself as a comical backwater individual, deliberately provoking both Luke and R2-D2.
Luke is shocked when he finally discovers that this small, eccentric creature is the powerful Jedi Master he was seeking.
Finding that Luke has the same anger and recklessness which caused his father's downfall, Yoda is reluctant to teach him the ways of the Force and agrees only at Obi-Wan's behest.
Before finishing his training, Luke chooses to leave Dagobah in order to confront Darth Vader and save his friends on Bespin.
Yoda and Obi-Wan warn him that he is not ready to face Vader and is being lured into a trap but Luke leaves anyway.
When Obi-Wan laments that Luke is their "last hope," Yoda reminds him that "there is another."
=====
Return of the Jedi (1983) =====
Yoda makes a brief appearance in Return of the Jedi, set a year after The Empire Strikes Back.
Now sick and frail, Yoda informs Luke that he has completed his training but will not be a Jedi until he confronts Darth Vader; he also confirms that Vader is Luke's father, something Vader had told Luke in the previous film.
Yoda then peacefully dies at the age of 900, his body disappearing as he becomes "one with the Force".
He leaves Luke with the knowledge that "there is another Skywalker.
"
Moments later, Obi-Wan's ghost helps Luke come to the realization that the "other" of whom Yoda spoke is his twin sister, Princess Leia.

In the film's final scene, after the Empire has been defeated, Luke sees Yoda's spirit looking upon him with pride alongside Obi-Wan and the redeemed Anakin Skywalker, Vader's former Jedi self.

===
Prequel trilogy ===


====
Episode
I: The Phantom Menace (1999) ====
Yoda returns as a younger version of himself in the prequel trilogy beginning with The Phantom Menace.
The film marked the final time Oz would portray the character as a puppet until the release of The Last Jedi (2017).
However, in the 2011 Blu-ray release of The Phantom Menace, the Yoda puppet was replaced by a CGI character to match the later depiction of the character.
In the film, which is set 35 years before The Empire Strikes Back, Jedi Master Qui-Gon Jinn brings the young Anakin Skywalker to the Jedi Council.
Qui-Gon is convinced that Anakin is the "Chosen One" of Jedi prophecy who will bring balance to the Force and requests the boy be trained as a Jedi.
Yoda senses great fear in Anakin, especially in regards to his attachment to his mother Shmi, and foresees "grave danger" in his training.
The Council, led at the time by Yoda's former padawan Mace Windu, rejects Qui-Gon's request.

When Qui-Gon is mortally wounded in a duel with Sith Lord Darth Maul, his dying request to his Padawan Obi-Wan Kenobi (Ewan McGregor) is that Anakin be trained as a Jedi.
Obi-Wan, determined to fulfill his promise to his master, tells Yoda that he will train the boy, even without the Council's approval.
Yoda makes Obi-Wan a Jedi knight and reluctantly gives his blessing to Anakin's training.

====
Episode II:
Attack of the Clones (2002) ====
Yoda makes his first CGI appearance in Attack of the Clones, set a decade after The Phantom Menace.
Yoda, now in direct control of the Order's policy as Master of the High Council in addition to his traditional position as Grandmaster, is one of the many Jedi who are concerned about the emergence of the Confederacy of Independent Systems, a secessionist movement wanting independence from the Galactic Republic.
After the first attempted assassination of Senator Padmé Amidala, Chancellor Palpatine suggests that she be put under the protection of Obi-Wan, who is training Anakin.
In a deleted scene, a meditating Yoda senses Anakin slaughtering the Tusken Raiders who murdered his mother.

At the climax of the film, Yoda arrives in time to save Obi-Wan and Anakin from the Separatists and defeats his former apprentice, Count Dooku, the Separatists’ leader and a Sith lord, in a lightsaber duel.

====
Episode III: Revenge of the Sith (2005) ====
In Revenge of the Sith, Yoda leads the Jedi Council in pursuing the mysterious Sith Lord Darth Sidious.
Palpatine has by then amassed near-dictatorial emergency powers and begins interfering in Jedi affairs by appointing Anakin as his personal representative on the Council.
The Council grants Anakin a Council seat but denies him the rank of Master, feeling that doing so would amount to giving Palpatine a vote in the Council.
Additionally they order him to spy on Palpatine, whom Anakin considers a friend and mentor.

Anakin seeks Yoda's counsel about his prophetic visions that someone close to him will die.
Yoda, unaware that the person of whom Anakin speaks is Padmé, or that she is Anakin's wife and pregnant with his child, tells him to "train yourself to let go of everything that you fear to lose.
"
Unsatisfied, Anakin turns to Palpatine, who then reveals himself as Darth Sidious.
Sidious manipulates the young Jedi into becoming his Sith apprentice, Darth Vader, with the promise that the dark side of the Force holds the power to save Padmé from dying in childbirth.

Sidious later transforms the Republic into the tyrannical Galactic Empire, proclaiming himself emperor for life and ordering the clone troopers to kill their Jedi generals.
Yoda is on Kashyyyk, overseeing the battle between the Separatist forces and a combined command of clone troopers and Wookiees.
Through the Force, Yoda feels the deaths of each of the Jedi as they are assassinated by their own troops.
After swiftly killing the clone troopers instructed to kill him, he escapes with Wookiee leaders Tarfful and Chewbacca to Coruscant, where he and Obi-Wan fight their way into the Jedi Temple to stop a trap for all surviving Jedi.
Inside, they discover that all the Jedi inside, younglings included, have been slaughtered.
They then discover a holographic recording revealing Vader as the assassin.
Yoda decides to face Sidious, sending Obi-Wan to kill Vader.
When Obi-Wan protests, Yoda tells him that the Anakin he knew no longer exists, having been "consumed by Darth Vader.
"

Subsequently, Yoda battles Sidious in a lightsaber duel that damages the Senate Rotunda.
In the end, neither is able to overcome the other and Yoda is forced to retreat.
He goes into exile on Dagobah so that he may hide from the Empire and wait for another opportunity to destroy the Sith.
At the end of the film, it is revealed that Yoda has been in contact with Qui-Gon's spirit, learning the secret of immortality from him and passing it on to Obi-Wan.

Yoda is also instrumental in deciding the fate of the Skywalker children after Padmé dies in childbirth, recommending that Luke and Leia be hidden from Vader and Sidious; he sends Leia to be adopted by Senator Bail Organa of Alderaan, and Luke to Vader's stepfamily Owen and Beru Lars on Tatooine.
Other than the ancient Jedi Master, only the Organas, the Lars family, R2-D2 and Obi-Wan know of their true identities.

===
Sequel trilogy ===


====
The Force Awakens (2015) ====
In The Force Awakens, set 30 years after Yoda's death in Return of the Jedi, Yoda's voice is heard by the young scavenger Rey in a Force vision after she discovers Luke Skywalker's light saber under a castle owned by Maz Kanata.

====
The Last Jedi (2017) ====
In The Last Jedi, Yoda appears to Luke as a Force spirit as he debates whether to burn down the tree storing the Sacred Texts of the Jedi.
As Luke makes his way to the tree, Yoda appears behind him and reminds him that a Jedi must always be sure of his path.
When Luke decides to burn down the tree, Yoda summons a lightning bolt and sets it ablaze.
When confronting Yoda as to why he did it, Yoda assures Luke that the books contained no knowledge that Rey didn't already possess.
He stressed that true Jedi knowledge was not found in books but within Jedi themselves--and it is their responsibility to pass that knowledge on, reminding him, "The greatest teacher, failure is."
As Luke takes in the message, he shares a quiet moment with his former master, who informs that the burden of all masters is being surpassed by their students.

Unlike in the prequels, where fight scenes necessitated the character be rendered in with computer-generated imagery, Yoda is once more portrayed using puppetry.

====
Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker  (2019) ====
Yoda appeared in Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker via voice-over as one of the voices of Jedi past who speak to Rey during her battle against Darth Sidious.
===
Animated series ===


====
Clone Wars (2003) ====
Yoda appears in the 2003 Cartoon Network 2D-animated television series Star Wars:
Clone Wars, voiced by Tom Kane.
In the show, Yoda is made a general, like many of the Jedi Knights and Masters.
Yoda escorts Padmé on their journey to an unspecified planet, but Yoda senses several Jedi in distress on Ilum.
Using the Jedi mind trick to convince Captain Typho to take them to Ilum, Yoda saves two Jedi Knights and finds a message from Count Dooku giving orders to destroy the Jedi Temple on Ilum.
In the animated series' final episode, Yoda fights side by side with Mace Windu to defend Coruscant, which is under attack from the Separatists.
The two Jedi Masters realize too late that the battle is a distraction; Separatist leader General Grievous truly intends to kidnap Palpatine.
The Jedi Master's effort to stop Grievous fails, and Palpatine is taken hostage, thus setting the stage for Revenge of the Sith.

In 2014, the series was deprecated from the Disney canon, in favor of the 3D CGI series Star Wars:
The Clone Wars.
====
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars (2008) ====
Yoda appears in The Clone Wars, again voiced by Tom Kane.
In the pilot film, Yoda assigns Anakin Skywalker his own padawan, Ahsoka Tano as he believes that she will help Anakin grow as a Jedi and as a person.
Throughout most of the series, Yoda spends his time on Coruscant with the Jedi Council but he occasionally leaves for certain tasks, such as negotiations with King Katuunko on Rugosa and a confrontation with Asajj Ventress's droid army.
Yoda also watches over Anakin and Ahsoka throughout the series, pleased that they are both maturing with each other's influence.
However, in the final arc of season five, Ahsoka is framed for a crime she didn't commit and Yoda and the Jedi Council turn her over to the Republic military.
Along with other members of the Council, Yoda observes Ahsoka's trial but Anakin bursts in with the true culprit, fallen Jedi Barriss Offee, before the verdict can be read.
Afterwards Yoda, Anakin, and the Council personally invite Ahsoka to rejoin the Order but she refuses and leaves.
According to show runner Dave Filoni, Yoda blames himself for Ahsoka's departure as he had made her Anakin's padawan in the first place.

In the final arc of the sixth season, Yoda hears Qui-Gon Jinn speaking to him from beyond the grave.
Yoda flees the Jedi Temple with R2-D2 to travel to Dagobah, his future home, to find answers.
Shown cryptic visions of the fall of the Jedi, Yoda learns he has been chosen to manifest his consciousness after death as a Force ghost.
Yoda is tested by a group of spirit priestesses in order to overcome trials and temptations on his pilgrimage; one of these tests is to face an illusion of ancient Sith lord Darth Bane.
Yoda's final test is to resist an attempt by Darth Sidious and Dooku to lure him to the dark side with a false vision of deceased Jedi Master Sifo Dyas.
Yoda engages in a metaphysical battle with Sidious and appears to sacrifice his life in order to save Anakin's–only to awaken and discover that the battle was merely a vision and that he has passed the test.
The priestesses inform Yoda that his training will resume in time.

====
Star Wars Rebels (2014) ====
Yoda was heard in the Star Wars Rebels episode "Path of the Jedi" with Frank Oz reprising the role for the first time since Revenge of the Sith.
He communicates with padawan Ezra Bridger and his master Kanan Jarrus during their experience in an ancient temple on Lothal, helping the pair do some soul-searching to analyze their true motivations.
He appears physically for the first time in the season two episode "Shroud of Darkness", in which he appears in a vision of Ezra's and reunites with Ahsoka.
His appearance in the series differs from his usual countenance as an homage to an early Ralph McQuarrie design for the character as well as a classic Kenner action figure.
This was justified by premise that Ezra is viewing the character through his own imagination, but the decision was confusing to many viewers.

===
Literature ===
Yoda appears extensively in the Star Wars Expanded Universe, mostly in works set during or before the prequel trilogy, including Sean Stewart's 2004 novel Yoda:
Dark Rendezvous, in which he sends an impersonator of himself to negotiate a potential treaty with Dooku, suspected his offer to be a feint.
He also appears as a supporting character in Dark Horse Comics' Republic, and various other Clone Wars-related titles.
In April 2014, following The Walt Disney Company's acquisition of Lucasfilm, all of these works were rebranded as Star Wars Legends and declared non-canon to the rest of the franchise.
Since 2014, Yoda has also been featured in a number of canon books and other works, including Dooku: Jedi Lost and Master & Apprentice, which take place before The Phantom Menace.
He is set to appear in the upcoming The High Republic Adventures, set 200 years before the prequel trilogy.

==
In popular culture ==
In 1980, American musician and parody artist "Weird Al" Yankovic wrote and recorded a parody of the Kinks' "Lola", called "Yoda".
It was later rerecorded for his 1985 album
Dare to Be Stupid, after Yankovic was able to obtain permission from both George Lucas and the Kinks.
In 2007, Yoda was selected by Empire magazine as the "25th greatest movie character of all time."
On their list of the 100 Greatest Fictional Characters, Fandomania.com ranked Yoda at number 60.Yoda
also appears in Disney's Star Tours:
The Adventures Continue attraction with his original voice actor, Frank Oz.
A life-size statue of Yoda greets visitors to Lucasfilm's Letterman Digital Arts Center in San Francisco's Presidio, the headquarters of Industrial Light and Magic.

Linguistics professor David Ager from Queen Mary University of London says Yoda's language most closely resembles the Hawaiian language.
In 2017, a photoshopped image of Yoda seated next to King Faisal at the signing of the Charter of the United Nations in San Francisco in 1945 was inadvertently printed in a social studies textbook.
The textbook was withdrawn once the error was discovered.
In 2019, discount store Poundland used the voice of Yoda at its self-service checkouts in stores across the United Kingdom.

===
Merchandising ===
TomTom has included a "Yoda" voice as one of the Celebrity GPS voicings in their "Star Wars" voice series.

====
Lego ====
Lego's Yoda minifigure was the first of their figures to be shorter than the other toys in the Lego Star Wars line; it has shorter legs than the other action figures.
Yoda appears in a television series based on the Lego Star Wars toys, including Lego Star Wars:
The Yoda Chronicles and The New Yoda Chronicles, of which he is the focus, as well as The Padawan Menace and Droid Tales.

==
Relationships ==


===
Mentorship tree ===


==
See also ==
Yoda conditions – a style of writing conditionals in computer programming languages


=
=
References ==
Works cited


==
External links ==
Yoda in the StarWars.com Databank
Yoda on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Yoda on IMDb
Yoda title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
Grogu (also known as "Baby Yoda" among fans and the media) is a character from the Star Wars Disney+
original television series The Mandalorian.
He is a toddler member of the same unnamed alien species as the Star Wars characters Yoda and Yaddle, with whom he shares a strong ability in the Force.
In the series, the protagonist known as "the Mandalorian" is hired to track down and capture Grogu for a remnant of the fallen Galactic Empire, but instead, he becomes his adoptive father and protects him from the Imperials.
The character's real name was not revealed until "Chapter 13:
The Jedi", which also explained that Grogu was raised at the Jedi Temple on Coruscant during the Clone Wars.
Prior to this, the character's official name, as used in subtitles and captions, was "The Child".

Grogu has appeared in every episode of the first two seasons, with the exception of "Chapter 15: The Believer".
He was created by The Mandalorian creator and showrunner Jon Favreau based upon his desire to explore the mystery around Yoda and his species.
The character was further developed in early conversations between Favreau and executive producer Dave Filoni, and the character's imagery was defined by concept artist Christian Alzmann.
Grogu is mostly a work of animatronics and puppetry, although accentuated with computer-generated imagery.

The puppet was designed by Legacy Effects.

Actor Adam Pally has stated that showrunner Jon Favreau told him it cost about $5 million to make.
It is controlled by two technicians, one who operates the eyes and mouth and another who controls other facial expressions.
The character's voice and sounds were created using a combination of adult and infant vocals, as well as recordings of a bat-eared fox and kinkajou.

The dynamic between the Mandalorian and Grogu embodies a theme of parenting and fatherhood prevalent in The Mandalorian, with the character also raising questions about good and evil and nature versus nurture in the series.

Grogu has received a positive reception from fans and reviewers, is widely considered the show's breakout character, and quickly became a popular Internet meme.
The Guardian called him "2019's biggest new character", and The Hollywood Reporter has said the character "represents the future of Hollywood".
Many writers have described Grogu as a key part in the success of Disney+.
Grogu was kept secret and was deliberately withheld from The Mandalorian's pre-release marketing and merchandise plans to avoid leaks before the show aired.
As a result, merchandise of Grogu was not immediately available after the first season debuted in November 2019, which some analysts say cost Disney $2.7 million in revenue, but Bob Iger, Disney's CEO at the time of The Mandalorian's premiere, has defended the strategy.

==
Appearances ==


===
Backstory ===
Grogu is a member of the same alien species as the Star Wars character Yoda.
He is 50 years old during the events of The Mandalorian, but still appears to be an infant because of the pace at which that species matures.
The species has never been given a proper name because Star Wars creator George Lucas wanted Yoda to maintain a sense of mystery.
Until Chapter 13 (i.e. episode 5 of season 2) of The Mandalorian, Grogu was not identified by a proper name, being referred to by sympathetic characters as "the child", "the kid", or "the baby", and by the antagonists as "the asset", "the bounty", "the target", or "the donor".
===
Season one ===
Grogu first appears in the series debut, "Chapter 1:
The Mandalorian", when the Mandalorian accepts a valuable commission from a mysterious man known only as "The Client" (Werner Herzog), who works for a remnant of the now-fallen Galactic Empire.
The assignment is to track down and capture an unidentified fifty-year-old target.
The Mandalorian and a fellow bounty hunter droid, IG-11 (Taika Waititi), infiltrate a remote and heavily defended encampment on the planet Arvala-7 and find Grogu.
When IG-11 attempts to kill Grogu, the Mandalorian protects him and instead shoots and destroys IG-11.
In "Chapter 2: The Child", Grogu is present when the Mandalorian is attacked by a giant rhinoceros-like creature called a Mudhorn.
As the beast rushes toward the Mandalorian for the kill, Grogu uses the Force to levitate the mudhorn, allowing a surprised Mandalorian to kill it.
The Mandalorian delivers Grogu to the Client on the planet Nevarro and collects his bounty in "Chapter 3: The Sin", after which the Client orders his colleague, Dr. Pershing (Omid Abtahi), to "extract the necessary material" from Grogu.
The Mandalorian later has second thoughts and returns to the Imperial compound to rescue Grogu, killing multiple stormtroopers.
This violates the code of the Bounty Hunters' Guild, and a group of bounty hunters led by guild leader Greef Karga (Carl Weathers) ambush the Mandalorian and attempt to take Grogu back from him.
The Mandalorian and Grogu are saved when fellow warriors from the Mandalorian's tribe come out of hiding to defend them, allowing them to escape Nevarro.
In "Chapter 4: Sanctuary", the Mandalorian seeks refuge in the sparsely populated planet Sorgan.
He plans to leave Grogu in a village there under the care of a widow named Omera (Julia Jones), but after another bounty hunter tracks them down, he realizes the planet is not safe.
The Mandalorian and Grogu visit the planet Tatooine in "Chapter 5
: The Gunslinger", during which the Mandalorian leaves Grogu in the care of a mechanic named Peli Motto (Amy Sedaris).
Grogu and Peli are briefly abducted by a bounty hunter named Toro Calican (Jake Cannavale), whom the Mandalorian kills.
In "Chapter 6: The Prisoner", the Mandalorian participates in a rescue job as part of a team of mercenaries organized by Ranzar Malk (Mark Boone Junior).
The Mandalorian keeps Grogu hidden on his ship during the mission, but the other mercenaries eventually find him.
One of them, a droid named Q9-0 (Richard Ayoade), learns of the bounty on Grogu and tries to kill him, but is himself destroyed by the Mandalorian.
At the start of the first season's penultimate episode, "Chapter 7: The Reckoning", the Mandalorian is contacted by Greef Karga, who says the Client has tightened his control over Nevarro as a result of the Mandalorian's actions there.
Greef proposes that the Mandalorian help him kill the Client and eliminate the Imperial presence from the planet, and in exchange he and Grogu will be safe from any further reprisals from the Guild.
The proposal is a trap, and Greef plans to ambush and kill the Mandalorian and return Grogu to the Client.
Nevertheless, the Mandalorian accepts the offer and returns to the planet along with Grogu and his allies Cara Dune (Gina Carano), Kuiil (Nick Nolte), and the recently-rebuilt IG-11, whom Kuiil has reprogrammed to be a nurse droid and protector for Grogu.
During their voyage, the party is attacked by pterodactyl-like creatures and Greef receives what would have been a fatal injury, but Grogu uses the Force to heal him.
Greef is so moved that he has a change of heart and informs the others about the trap.
They devise a new plan in which Kuiil will bring Grogu back to the Mandalorian's ship, while the others will kill the Client and his troops.
The plan goes wrong and Kuiil is killed by Imperial Scout Troopers, who briefly abduct Grogu before he is rescued by IG-11 at the start of the first-season finale, "Chapter 8: Redemption".
IG-11 brings Grogu back to the Mandalorian, Cara, and Greef and helps defend them against an ambush by the Imperial leader Moff Gideon (Giancarlo Esposito), who is revealed to have been seeking Grogu all along.
He does not reveal why he wants Grogu, but says he "means more to me than you will ever know".
After surviving an attack by Gideon's stormtroopers, during which Grogu uses the Force to deflect the fire of an attacking stormtrooper's flamethrower back against him, the group escapes with Grogu through a sewer grate.
They seek help from the hidden Mandalorian tribe, but it is revealed the Imperials wiped out the tribe after they revealed themselves in "Chapter 3: The Sin".
The tribe's leader, "The Armorer" (Emily Swallow), instructs the Mandalorian to watch over and protect Grogu, who she formally adopts into the Mandalorian culture as a "foundling", like the Mandalorian once was himself.
She instructs the Mandalorian to seek out and deliver Grogu to the others of his kind, and that until this occurs, the Mandalorian and Grogu are a "clan of two", and that the Mandalorian will be like a father to him.
She declares their "signet" to be a likeness of a Mudhorn, the creature the Mandalorian and Grogu worked together to kill in "Chapter 2:
The Child".
The group departs, and IG-11 sacrifices himself to destroy an entire squad of stormtroopers to protect Grogu.
After fending off a final attack from Moff Gideon, the Mandalorian once again departs from Nevarro with Grogu.

===
Season two ===
Grogu accompanies the Mandalorian during his search for other Mandalorians who could help him find the child's people: the Jedi.
In "Chapter 9: The Marshal", the pair return to Tatooine and meet Cobb Vanth (Timothy Olyphant), the Marshal of Mos Pelgo, who is not a true Mandalorian but wears Mandalorian armor.
The Mandalorian helps Vanth slay a krayt dragon which had been attacking Mos Pelgo in exchange for his armor, along the way arranging an uneasy alliance between the townspeople and a Tusken Raider tribe, and developing deep respect for Vanth, to the point he entrusts him to look after Grogu, should he perish during his attempt to kill the dragon.
In "Chapter 10:
The Passenger", the Mandalorian and Grogu leave for Trask, where they must take a contact, "Frog Lady" (Misty Rosas, voiced by Dee Bradley Baker), and her eggs in exchange for a lead on other Mandalorians.
During their journey, Grogu takes a liking to the eggs and eats a few of them despite being explicitly forbidden from doing so by the Mandalorian.
Grogu's appetite also gets the group into trouble while stranded on Maldo Kreis, where he eats a spider-like creature egg just as the rest of the swarm hatches, though they are ultimately saved by two X-wing pilots (Dave Filoni and Paul Sun-Hyung Lee) from the New Republic.
In "Chapter 11: The Heiress", the group arrives on Trask and, after bringing Frog Lady and her remaining eggs to her husband, the Mandalorian and Grogu encounter Bo-Katan Kryze (Katee Sackhoff) and two other Mandalorian warriors, who save them from a crew of Quarrens who tried to kill the two and steal the Mandalorian's armor.
While the Mandalorian accompanies Bo-Katan's team on a mission in exchange for a lead on Jedi, Grogu is left with the Frog Man and Frog Lady, during which time the eggs hatch and Grogu bonds with the newborn tadpoles.

In "Chapter 12: The Siege", the Mandalorian and Grogu return to Nevarro for repairs to the Razor Crest, and reunite with Greef Karga and Cara Dune, who have since turned the planet around.
While the Mandalorian goes with Greef, Cara and their Mythrol companion (Horatio Sanz) to destroy the last Imperial base on Nevarro in exchange for said repairs, Grogu is left at a local school, where he uses the Force to steal some cookies from a boy.
This episode also provides a clue as to what the Empire's plans with Grogu are; while exploring the Imperial base, the Mandalorian and the others stumble upon cloning experiments performed by Imperial scientists, involving Grogu's blood, some of which has already been transfused to the clones to supposedly give them Force-sensitivity.

In "Chapter 13:
The Jedi", the Mandalorian takes Grogu to former Jedi Ahsoka Tano (Rosario Dawson) on Corvus, who communicates with him through the Force, learning his name and that he is a former Jedi youngling who was rescued from the Jedi Temple on Coruscant during the Great Jedi Purge and hidden for his own safety, which is why he suppresses his Force powers.
While Ahsoka is reluctant to train Grogu because of his strong attachment to the Mandalorian, she tells the latter to take him to the Jedi Temple on Tython, where Grogu might reach out to another Jedi through the Force and choose his own destiny.

In "Chapter 14:
The Tragedy", the Mandalorian brings Grogu to said temple, where he begins meditating, creating a protective Force field around him.
Moff Gideon's Imperial remnant, having tracked down the Mandalorian, soon attacks in an attempt to capture Grogu, who continues his meditation while being protected by the Mandalorian and the recently arrived Boba Fett (Temuera Morrison) and Fennec Shand (Ming-Na Wen), who made a deal with the former to protect Grogu in exchange for Fett's armor (which the Mandalorian obtained from Cobb Vanth).
Despite their best efforts, Grogu is captured by Gideon's Dark Troopers and taken to his cruiser, where he is imprisoned inside a holding cell.
Later, Gideon witnesses Grogu using his Force powers on two stormtroopers that he throws around the cell, before stunning him and preparing to take him to Dr. Pershing to complete the blood transfusion.

In "Chapter 16:
The Rescue", the Mandalorian boards Gideon's ship to rescue Grogu, assisted by Cara, Fett, Fennec, Bo-Katan, and Koska Reeves (Mercedes Varnado).
While Fett provides cover from Slave I and the others take control of the ship's bridge, the Mandalorian confronts and defeats Gideon.
With Gideon captured and Grogu in their custody, the Mandalorian and his allies have their escape route cut off by a platoon of Dark Trooper droids until Luke Skywalker arrives with R2-D2 and destroys the Dark troopers.
When Luke offers to raise and train Grogu, the Mandalorian, realizing that the child's destiny is to become a Jedi, reluctantly allows him to go with Luke.
During an emotional farewell, the Mandalorian removes his helmet to let Grogu see his face for the first time, and promises to meet him again.
The episode then ends with the two of them looking back at each other while Luke walks away carrying Grogu.

== Characterization ==
Physically, Grogu closely resembles Yoda, sharing his signature green skin and long, pointed ears.
Grogu is small in size, with wide eyes, short hairs, and wrinkled skin.
Grogu is capable of sitting up, crawling, walking and eating.
He appears capable of understanding some language spoken around him, but cannot speak except in baby-like babble noises.
Anthony Breznican of Vanity Fair stated: "There is an emotional transference happening here.
The audience cares more about the unnamed, faceless Mandalorian because he cares so much about Baby Yoda."
Rebecca Keegan of The Hollywood Reporter believes Grogu displays a form of wisdom despite his young age, describing him as "a Dalai Lama in toddler form".
Jeanne Cavelos, former NASA astrophysicist and author of The Science of Star Wars, also believes Grogu demonstrates intelligence beyond his years, noting his awareness and empathy toward beings even when their faces or bodies are covered completely, as well as his ability to recognize injury in others and attempt to repair it.
Despite his youth, Grogu demonstrates a considerable ability to use and manipulate the Force, such as when he lifts the large Mudhorn creature into the air in "Chapter 2: The Child", and when he deflects the fire of an attacking stormtrooper's flamethrower back against him in "Chapter 8: Redemption".
Kevin Melrose of Comic Book Resources noted that in the original Star Wars trilogy film The Empire Strikes Back (1980), Luke Skywalker struggled to lift an X-wing fighter due to its large size, so the fact that Grogu can lift heavy objects despite his diminutive size and young age demonstrates the vastness of his Force powers.
Grogu also repeatedly shows a desire to use the Force to help those around him, such as when he attempts to heal the Mandalorian's wounds in "Chapter 2: The Child", and when he heals Greef Karga's near-fatal wounds in "Chapter 7: The Reckoning".
However, after using the Force in this manner, Grogu is often exhausted and slips into unconsciousness, indicating that he is still developing his power and does not yet have the skills to fully control it.
Despite his raw natural ability with the Force, Grogu is untrained and still depends heavily on the Mandalorian and other allies for protection.
Grogu has a sweet temperament, and comes across as innocent and kindhearted to most of the people he encounters, but is also occasionally capable of violence, such as during a scene in "Chapter 7:
The Reckoning" when he uses the Force to choke Cara Dune while she is engaging the Mandalorian in a friendly arm wrestling match.
==
Concept and creation ==


===
Conception ===
Grogu was conceived by Jon Favreau, the creator and showrunner of The Mandalorian.
Upon learning that Lucasfilm had been sold to the Walt Disney Company in 2012, Favreau began imagining working on a Star Wars project, and was particularly interested in exploring the events after the original Star Wars trilogy.
He conceived Grogu based upon a desire to explore the mystery around Yoda and his species, and an interest in presenting a character from Yoda's species at the beginning of his journey, in contrast to Yoda ending his own journey in Return of the Jedi (1983).
Favreau believed part of the appeal of Yoda was that George Lucas deliberately kept his origins and details about the species mysterious, and Favreau believed that sense of mystery would extend to Grogu: "I think that's why people are so curious about this little one of the same species."

In mid-2017, shortly after Favreau pitched The Mandalorian to Lucasfilm President Kathleen Kennedy, she suggested he meet with Dave Filoni, who had co-created several Star Wars animated series.
Filoni said of his meeting with Favreau:When he brought up in the very beginning of doing this child and having it be of Yoda's species, I was like, ‘Oh, that's very tricky, because there's never been this before outside of Yoda, and then Yaddle in the prequels on the Jedi Council.
It's kind of a sacred thing ...
We just have to be responsible when we're telling a story with what we're deciding to do.
The fans want to know things are a calculated, careful decision.
Then if you tell a good story, most of the time they go with it.
The character of Grogu was further developed in early conversations between Favreau and Filoni, the latter of whom drew a rough sketch of the character on cocktail napkins during the talks.
Multiple artists worked to refine the image of Grogu created by Filoni, but the definitive imagery came from a concept drawing by artist Christian Alzmann, which depicted the character's makeshift garment.
Favreau said of this rendering: "It looked cute, but it also looked a little weird.
That's part of Yoda.
It can't just be cute.
It can't just be a straight-up Disney baby, it has to be a little bit tweaked.
"
The team sought to establish mannerisms and expressions for Grogu that would remind viewers of a pet with whom they might share a connection.
These characteristics include Grogu's ears, posture, and the way he cocks his head.
Disney CEO Bob Iger said of Grogu: "The moment I laid eyes on the character, I had a strong feeling that it was going to connect with audiences.
So cute, so interesting, so compelling.
So familiar and yet so new.
"
Favreau has clarified that Grogu is not a younger version of Yoda himself, but has declined to comment upon whether he is related to Yoda or otherwise connected to him.

===
Development ===
Grogu is mostly a work of animatronics and puppetry, although accentuated with computer-generated imagery (CGI).
Legacy Effects, the special effects studio started by protégés of special make-up effects creator Stan Winston, designed the Grogu puppet and supplied the puppeteers to animate it during filming.
The puppet cost about $5 million to make, and is relatively heavy due to the amount of wires and animatronic technology inside it.
It is controlled by two technicians, one who operates the eyes and mouth and another who controls other facial expressions.
There are several stand-in versions for Grogu used in filming in addition to the primary puppet.
The crew of The Mandalorian wanted to use animatronics for Grogu as often as possible.
However, they also shot versions of the character's scenes both with and without the puppet, so they had the option of replacing it with a CGI effect in post-production if the puppet did not look satisfactory.
When CGI is used, Favreau said they try to make the character obey the same physical laws that he would if he were a puppet, adding: "I think a lot of times CG makes itself too obvious where you don't create parameters creatively
that allow the character to keep the same identity and charm.
"

The voice and sounds of Grogu were created by David Acord and Matthew Wood, sound editors with Skywalker Sound, who had previously worked on various Star Wars projects.
Acord recorded animals' noises at a wildlife rescue near San Diego, and used recordings of a bat-eared fox and kinkajou to make the initial version of Grogu's voice.
However, Favreau suggested the voice needed to sound more human-like and relatable to audiences, so instead the animal sounds were scaled back and used only for small grunts and cooing noises.
Actual infant vocals were used to create the new version of Grogu's voice, and Acord used a highly-pitched version of his own voice for some of the more articulated vocalizations.
Acord also previously voiced Rotta the Hutt, the young Huttlet son of Jabba the Hutt, in the animated film Star Wars:
The Clone Wars (2008).
===
Filming ===
The character was referred to as "The Child" in screenplays for The Mandalorian, though Bryce Dallas Howard, who directed "Chapter 4: Sanctuary", said she always referred to him on set simply as "Baby", and other cast members called it "The Being".
During filming, the director of each episode would communicate with Grogu's puppeteers to discuss what was happening in the scene, what emotions Grogu should express, and what actions the character should take.
Director Deborah Chow said in this way, it was similar to providing direction to a living actor.
Favreau encouraged the directors to test and push the boundaries of the Grogu puppet during filming, urging them to experiment and attempt to get the most realistic movements and mannerisms possible from the character.
Brendan Wayne, a body double for the Mandalorian character, said the puppet looked so realistic that performing against it felt like working with an actual child actor.
Rick Famuyiwa, the director of "Chapter 2: The Child", said he was shocked when he learned that the premiere episode of The Mandalorian ended with the introduction of Grogu, because it meant he would be directing the next episode that further expanded upon the character.
The Grogu puppet was popular on set with the show's cast and crew.
Chow said: "With the baby, every time it came on set, the whole crew would respond to it.
Even the grip department, every production assistant is coming to the monitors, trying to see it."
Howard screamed in excitement when she first saw it, and Gina Carano said of Grogu: "That was our precious.
Our precious is this being that we all end up taking care of in some way."
Emily Swallow said she "fell in love with it like everybody else", adding: "I was thrilled when they brought him in that little bag for the scene that I got to have with it.
I just wanted to snuggle it."
Amy Sedaris said the animatronic Grogu puppet made everyone on the set happy: "The minute you looked into Baby Yoda's eyes you just got lost."
Likewise, Giancarlo Esposito said he enjoyed interacting with the Grogu puppet during filming: "It melts my heart, because the reality is, this little baby does things that you could never imagine and when you look at those eyes and that little body, how can you not help but fall in love?"
Carl Weathers has said of him: "He is very interesting and very knowledgeable and very cute.
I never use that word, but he is a cute little guy."

Werner Herzog particularly enjoyed filming scenes with the animatronic Grogu puppet, which he called "heartbreakingly beautiful".
Chow said directing the scene between Herzog and Grogu in "Chapter 3:
The Sin" was "one of the weirdest" moments of her career, because he had so much affection for the puppet and was interacting with it like it was a living being.
She said: "I literally think that he had forgotten that it's not a real-live creature
and he had fallen in love with it."
Herzog strongly urged the Mandalorian filmmakers to use the puppet for the character and not CGI.
While filming one scene, Dave Filoni began to remove the puppet to shoot an alternate take, in case they decided to use a CGI version of Grogu in its place.
Herzog passionately urged him not to do so and to remain committed to the animatronics and puppetry, saying: "You are cowards.
Leave it.
Leave it.
"
Esposito has also said having an actual Grogu puppet to perform against has been beneficial for the cast, because "that space allows all of us to be so wowed by its presence".
Misty Rosas, who delivered the motion capture performance for Kuiil, often held the Grogu puppet during her scenes in "Chapter 7:
The Reckoning".
This occasionally proved challenging for Rosas, who also had to manage the weight of the animatronics in her own costume and face mask, as well as the weight of Grogu prop.
One full day of filming the episode focused upon Kuiil riding the blurrg creature, a process Rosas described as "intense" due to the amount of time she spent on the fake creature and the speeds at which it was made to run.
The process was made further challenging because she was carrying the heavy animatronic Grogu puppet throughout the scenes, and she occasionally needed breaks between takes.
Rosas said: "My legs are not exactly long, so I was squeezing for dear life and holding the baby."
Nevertheless, Rosas said she enjoyed working with Grogu character, saying: "He just melts my heart, he's so cute.
"During
the opening scene of "Chapter 8: Redemption", an Imperial Scout Trooper portrayed by comedian Adam Pally punched Grogu.
During the first take of filming the scene, Pally punched the animatronic Grogu puppet hard, prompting Favreau to inform the actor that the puppet cost about $5 million to make.
This made Pally so nervous that he missed Grogu altogether when he tried to punch him in the three subsequent takes.
Pally joked about working with Grogu: "I gotta tell you, the truth is that Baby Yoda is a bit of a diva.
He's constantly vaping."
At some point during filming of The Mandalorian, George Lucas visited the set and held the Grogu puppet.
Favreau posted a picture of Lucas holding Grogu on Instagram on January 16, 2020, which drew considerable Internet attention.

===
Prerelease ===
Grogu was kept secret and was deliberately withheld from The Mandalorian's prerelease marketing and merchandise plans due to the risk that details about the character could leak before the show aired.
Favreau said of this plan: "I think that part of what people really value is to be surprised and delighted, and I think that's becoming all too rare."
Favreau has credited Donald Glover as the source of that strategy.
While developing The Mandalorian, Favreau was simultaneously directing Glover in the photorealistic remake of The Lion King (2019).
While discussing music and pop culture, Glover told Favreau that people enjoy being surprised, because true surprises had become much less common in the Internet era.
As an example, Glover cited the excitement generated by the sudden releases of surprise albums by singer and songwriter Beyoncé.
Favreau felt keeping Grogu a secret until he was revealed would allow fans to connect with the character and "discover the story as it was unfolding".
The leadership and marketing team at the Walt Disney Company was supportive of this strategy.
Screeners of the pilot episode were not distributed to reviewers to avoid leaks about Grogu, and the official Lucasfilm and Star Wars social media accounts did not start posting messages about Grogu until about a week after the series debuted, to avoid spoiling the character's debut as much as possible.

==
Themes ==


===
Parenting and fatherhood ===
One of the primary themes of The Mandalorian is parenting and fatherhood, particularly through the father-son relationship dynamic between the Mandalorian and Grogu.
Ryan Britt of Fatherly wrote: "For years the Star Wars franchise avoided depicting a parent-child dynamic.
With Mando and Baby Yoda, that’s finally changing."
Vulture writer Kathryn VanArendonk argued that parenting has been the subject of past Star Wars stories, but almost always during later stages of parenthood, rather than an infant in early developmental stages such as Grogu.
As examples, she cited Obi-Wan Kenobi serving as a mentor to the adolescent Anakin Skywalker, Princess Leia lamenting over her grown son Kylo Ren, or the absence of Rey's parents.
Several reviewers have compared the dynamic between Grogu and the Mandalorian to Lone Wolf and Cub, a manga about a samurai warrior and his young son.
Grogu makes the Mandalorian a softer and more relatable character; he changes in a positive way because of raising Grogu, becoming less selfish and self-absorbed.
Several examples of the Mandalorian parenting Grogu appear throughout the series, such as when he stops Grogu from pressing random buttons in the cockpit of the Mandalorian's spaceship, ultimately by holding him in his lap.
In another example, the Mandalorian sets up a car seat for Grogu in the cockpit of his ship, so he can be seated safely and comfortably during their travels.
The relationship between the Mandalorian and Grogu is an example of unexpected fatherhood.
The Mandalorian feels a connection and parental bond with Grogu because of his own childhood, when he was orphaned upon the death of his parents and was adopted by the Mandalorian culture as a "foundling".
Nevertheless, fatherhood was not a role the Mandalorian was initially seeking, and he makes repeated initial attempts to avoid this responsibility.
He first does so in "Chapter 3:
The Sin", when he leaves Grogu with the Client, and then again in "Chapter 4: Sanctuary", when he plans to leave Grogu with Omera, a protective mother on the planet Sorgan who is willing to take Grogu into her own family.
The Mandalorian does not fully commit to the role of fatherhood until the first-season finale, "Chapter 8: Redemption", when Grogu himself is also adopted into the Mandalorian culture as a "foundling" and the Mandalorian is formally declared to be his father figure.
Anthony Breznican of Vanity Fair has noted that none of the day-to-day difficulties of parenthood are portrayed in the series: "There is no shrill squawking from Baby Yoda, no tantrum, no spit-up, no uncontrollable shrieking that burrows into a parent’s psyche like a dentist’s drill shredding a soft, pink nerve."
Likewise, Vulture writer Kathryn VanArendonk said the show ignores or does not address many parenting details that make fatherhood difficult, such as what Grogu eats, when he goes to sleep, and whether he wears diapers.
She wrote: "The Mandalorian is uninterested in diapers, and so Mando gets to be a very particular image of fatherhood: the guy who doesn't have to sweat the small stuff."
VanAnderonk described this as a wish fulfillment fantasy for parents or prospective parents: "a vision of parenting stripped so thoroughly of all detail and specificity that all that’s left are archetypes: the parent, the child".
Grogu encounters a handful of other protector figures throughout the first season, including Omera, IG-11, and Peli Motto.
Some observers have criticized the series for the fact that the Mandalorian repeatedly leaves Grogu alone or in the hands of relative strangers, as well as for making decisions that place Grogu in danger.
One example is in "Chapter 6:
The Prisoner", when he allows a team of dangerous mercenaries to use his ship while Grogu is on board, nearly resulting in Grogu's death.
An interaction the Mandalorian has with Peli Motto in "Chapter 5:
The Gunslinger" is one of the most overt discussions about the challenges of caring for Grogu.
When the Mandalorian accidentally wakes Grogu, who had been sleeping in Peli's arms, she chides him: "Do you have any idea
how long it took me to get it to sleep?
"
She also condemns the Mandalorian for leaving Grogu alone on the ship, saying: "you have an awful lot to learn about raising a young one".
ScreenCrush writer Matt Singer argued the Mandalorian's parenting errors make the show that much more appealing and relatable because making mistakes is a large part of being a parent.

===
Good and evil; nature versus nurture ===
One scene in "Chapter 7:
The Reckoning" led many fans to reevaluate Grogu and question whether he may demonstrate evil tendencies.
During a scene on the Mandalorian's spaceship, Grogu observes as the Mandalorian and Cara Dune engage in a friendly arm wrestling match.
During the contest, Grogu uses the Force to choke Cara, nearly strangling her to death before the Mandalorian intervenes.
Throughout the Star Wars franchise, that ability has been most commonly associated with the dark side of the Force, and particularly with the antagonist character Darth Vader.
Sarah Bea Milner of Screen Rant wrote: "The moment is genuinely shocking — and more than a little disturbing."
Some reviewers noted, however, that Grogu likely mistakenly believed the Mandalorian was in danger and intervened to help.
Additionally, in the same episode, Grogu uses the Force to heal and save Greef Karga, a power typically associated with the Light Side.
Peter Foy of Comic Book Resources wrote: "It doesn't exactly seem realistic that Disney would blow its merchandising potential with the little cutie by going all Damien (The Omen) in his storyline.
"Nevertheless
, some writers have suggested viewers had been underestimating Grogu's capacity for evil because he is cute.
Fans speculated Grogu could be presenting a false personality or using the Force to manipulate people into caring about him to help ensure his survival.
Esquire writer Matt Miller noted that Yoda lied about his identity during his initial appearance in The Empire Strikes Back, posing as a simple-minded observer to Luke Skywalker before revealing himself to be a Jedi Master.
Miller suggested Grogu could be putting on a similar performance.
One fan theory suggests Grogu could be related to a prophecy in a past Star Wars work that predicted an evil that could consume the galaxy.
The prophecy, described in the novel Star Wars: Master and Apprentice (2019), says: "The danger of the past is not past, but sleeps in an egg.
When the egg cracks, it will threaten the galaxy entire.
"
Fans theorized this could refer to Grogu, who sleeps in an egg-like bassinet in The Mandalorian.
Others have theorized the reason the Imperial remnant wants Grogu is to turn him over to the dark side of the Force, or for use as a weapon.
Moff Gideon in the season finale says, "You may think you have some idea what you’re in possession of, but you do not."
Peter Foy of Comic Book Resources suggested this could allude to Grogu's potential to cause mass destruction.

However, in "The Rescue," Moff Gideon reveals that he only needed Grogu's blood.

Caitlin Gallagher of Bustle suggested rather than building toward Grogu becoming evil, the show could be suggesting the Mandalorian needs to find a way to raise Grogu in a less violent environment.
All season long, Grogu has witnessed those around him committing violent acts.
For example, Vulture writer Keith Phipps noticed that when IG-11 kills multiple stormtroopers in front of him, Grogu has a "look of wonder" in his eyes, which Phipps said "is hilarious, but also a little chilling".
Some writers applied a nature versus nurture argument to this, contending Grogu is becoming violent because of what he is learning based on the actions around him.
This suggests Grogu is not inherently good or evil, but that instead, like all children, he is impressionable and does not fully understand the events occurring around him.
He is learning about life and needs guidance as he develops his abilities.
This is why he uses Force powers generally associated with both the light and dark sides of the Force.
It will largely fall to the Mandalorian to provide this guidance, as when the Mandalorian stops him from strangling Cara.

==
Cultural impact ==


===
Critical reception ===
Grogu has received a positive reception from fans and reviewers, and is widely considered the show's breakout character.
Fans immediately adopted the nickname "Baby Yoda" to describe the character, a moniker Favreau has embraced as "the easiest, shortest, most hashtagable way to identify that character".
However, the nickname is not used internally by the crew of The Mandalorian, and Disney CEO Bob Iger said he "got [his] wrist slapped" by Favreau for calling the character Baby Yoda in e-mail messages.
Iger later said the scale of the positive reaction to Grogu was "beyond my expectations by a wide margin".
Several writers described Grogu as a pop culture phenomenon, particularly noting the adoration it had received from fans on social media.
The Guardian called Baby Yoda "2019's biggest new character", and Bryan Alexander of USA Today wrote: "There's nothing hotter in the universe than Baby Yoda."
Some critics noted that fandom for Grogu transcended age and experience, and that few fictional characters unite entire fan bases in the way Grogu had; Anthony Breznican of Vanity Fair wrote: "In an era of bitter division on nearly all matters, there is seemingly unanimous adoration for this tiny alien creature.
"Vox
writer Allegra Frank said Grogu made The Mandalorian "instantly more memorable and evocative", and alleviated the solitude and tension that might otherwise have surrounded the show's protagonist.
Carolyn Giardina of The Hollywood Reporter said Grogu helped The Mandalorian not only achieve critical and commercial success, but also impact the cultural zeitgeist.
Beyond the show, other writers have described the character as a key component in the success of Disney's rollout of the Disney+ streaming service.
Julia Alexander of The Verge wrote: "There's no question that Baby Yoda is driving interest in Disney+".
Some critics called Grogu one of the best and most lauded new Star Wars characters in recent memory, while others said the character had made the Star Wars franchise relevant to an even wider range of audiences.
Vulture writer Madison Malone Kircher described Grogu as an example of a character so popular that his fame nearly eclipsed that of his own franchise, comparing him to Baby Groot from the Guardians of the Galaxy films.
The Guardian writer Zach Vasquez noted past Star Wars works had featured young characters that have not resonated as strongly as Grogu, so he credited his success with the character's designers and special effects.
Likewise, Robyn Bahr of The Hollywood Reporter said the positive response to Grogu, along with that of the show
The Dark Crystal:
Age of Resistance, demonstrate that audiences still desire puppetry, animatronics, and practical effects rather than only CGI.
Bahr wrote: "If Baby Yoda were entirely 3D animation, he wouldn't have become an icon the minute we laid our eyes on him.
"Grogu was featured on the cover of the December 2019 issue of The Hollywood Reporter, along with the headline: "Baby Yoda represents the future of Hollywood".
In an article in the magazine, writer Rebecca Keegan argued Grogu is the culmination of several shifts and trends in the entertainment industry over the decade prior to the release of The Mandalorian.
These include the decline of the traditional movie star, the growth of streaming media services, the rise of Internet culture, and technological advances in CGI.
Variety writer Caroline Framke said she fell in love with the character even despite acknowledging that he is an "inherently manipulative product of the most powerful media
conglomerate".
Not all reviews of Grogu were positive.
An online report conducting an analysis of which U.S. states responded most positively to Grogu, finding that interest in him was highest in Utah, and lowest in Mississippi.
Rolling Stone writer Alan Sepinwall said the reveal of Grogu was a rehash of the appearance of Rotta the Hutt in Star Wars: The Clone Wars.
Emily VanDerWerff of Vox described the character as "yet another merchandising opportunity" and did not feel the character was worth Disney attempting to keep secret before his reveal.
BBC writer Caryn James said he did not believe anyone without an emotional attachment to Star Wars would care about Grogu.
Jeremy Gordon of The Outline called Grogu the "product of a merciless capitalist machine" intended primarily to generate merchandising revenue for Disney.
Gordon wrote: "It's not really Baby Yoda
I hate, of course.
He's really cute.
It's the feeling that I'm being pandered to, that all of this is a foregone conclusion."
Emma Gray Ellis wrote that there was some backlash to Grogu on social media in response to the character's massive Internet popularity.
She wrote: "There's something grindingly, performatively grouchy in leaping forward to damn something that 'everyone' likes, in no small part because everyone likes it."

Grogu ranked first on several Screen Rant lists about the series, including the most interesting characters from the first season of The Mandalorian, the best characters from the show, and the best costumes from the first season.

===
Internet memes ===
Grogu quickly became a popular Internet meme.
In the week following the debut of The Mandalorian, Grogu was driving almost twice as many social media interactions on news stories about it as any of the 2020 Democratic presidential candidates.
The Baby Yoda search term saw continuous growth on Google Trends in the weeks following the release of The Mandalorian.
There were 2.28 million social media interactions about the characters on news stories in the first two weeks after the release of The Mandalorian, and 2 million tweets featuring the words "Baby Yoda" were sent on Twitter between November 12 and December 5, 2019.
When Favreau tweeted a concept art image of the character by artist Christian Alzmann on November 19, it received more than 34,000 retweets and 217,000 likes within one week.
Various celebrities have tweeted about the character, including Ariana Grande, Elon Musk, Dwayne Johnson, Russell Wilson, Alex Rodriguez, and Donald Trump Jr. Zach Vasquez of The Guardian wrote: "It's now practically impossible to scroll through any social media platform without being inundated with pics, videos, memes and gifs of the bug-eyed, big-eared tot."
The Los Angeles Times included Grogu in its list of "2019's Internet Obsessions", with writer Christie D'Zurilla writing: "Baby Yoda won the Internet in 2019."One of the more popular memes involved a screenshot from "Chapter 4: Sanctuary" in which Grogu casually sips from a mug of soup, which has been compared to a similar meme of Kermit the Frog passive-aggressively sipping a glass of tea.
Another popular meme used a scene from that episode in which Grogu randomly presses buttons in the cockpit of the Mandalorian's spaceship, with most of the memes changing the audio so that it appeared Grogu was trying to put various songs on the radio.
In late November 2019, the online GIF database Giphy temporarily removed its GIFs of Grogu due to "confusion" over the legal status of the images, sparking outrage among fans.
However, they were quickly restored, and Giphy issued an apology to Disney for having removed them.
Various sports teams have created their own memes with Grogu, including Los Angeles Clippers, New York Islanders, Phoenix Suns, Pittsburgh Steelers, San Francisco Giants, Sacramento Kings, Seattle Mariners, and Tennessee Volunteers football.

===
Cultural references ===
In December 2019, artwork of Disney CEO Bob Iger with Grogu appeared in the Time magazine article naming Iger their Businessperson of the Year.
The New Yorker published a cartoon of a woman pushing a baby stroller and saying to the baby inside it: "No offense, but Baby Yoda, like, blows you out of the water.
"
Ice2Ice, a musician associated with the website The Ringer, released "Dear Baby Yoda: A Love Song" on December 3, 2019, with the music based upon the song "Dear Theodosia" from the musical Hamilton.
The character was also mentioned in the December 2019 South Park episode "Basic Cable".
In the episode, a character named Scott Malkinson attempts to get Disney+
because the woman he is interested in loves Grogu, so he believes she will love him too if he gets the streaming service.
Grogu was also parodied in the December 14, 2019 episode of Saturday Night Live.
He was portrayed by comedian Kyle Mooney in a Weekend Update segment, in which he gossiped about the Mandalorian cast, talked about his future business ventures, and threatened Baby Groot.
At the 77th Golden Globe Awards, host Ricky Gervais jokingly mistook Joe Pesci for "Baby Yoda".
On February 20, the United States Army revealed that a M1 Abrams tank belonging to the 3rd Infantry Division of Fort Stewart in Georgia had been named after Grogu, with the words "BABY YODA" printed on the barrel of its gun.
Some critics have noted that other media companies introduced young versions of their own characters following the debut of Grogu, and suggested they could be attempts to capitalize on Grogu's success.
As an example, Ashley Carman of The Verge cited "Baby Sonic", a young version of the video game character Sonic the Hedgehog who appears in his 2020 film, which she described as "like something ripped out of Disney's playbook".
===
Merchandise ===
Due to the secrecy surrounding Grogu, designs of the character were withheld from product manufacturers in the months prior to the release of The Mandalorian.
As a result, toys and merchandise of the character were not available in time for the 2019 Christmas season, despite a high demand for them.
The Walt Disney Company accepted this plan despite knowing it would cost the company merchandising revenue in the short term; Favreau said "they understood the value of it".
Iger said if Grogu's design had been distributed for toys before the show's release, "it would have gone out to hundreds and hundreds of people, probably all over the world, and we didn't want to do that".
Iger reiterated that Disney is a story-first company which has "never set out to tell a story simply because it can become a toy or a game or a consumer product of some sort", and he described the wait to unveil Grogu as "worth it".
The Amazon product research tool Jungle Scout projected that Disney may have lost $2.7 million in revenue because of the delay in release merchandise of Grogu; demand for toys of Grogu were so high that Amazon customers searched for Baby Yoda products more than 90,000 times in one month.
David Lazarus, consumer columnist for the Los Angeles Times, said he understood Disney's strategy, but felt the company missed out on significant commercial opportunity: "The fact that they didn't anticipate that this was going to be a commercial goldmine is insane, and that they let this opportunity slip away strikes me as sheer madness.
"Due
to the scarcity of licensed merchandise of Grogu, many unlicensed products featuring the character were created and sold through the Internet, including via websites like Etsy.
These included felt and crocheted dolls, shirts, jewellery, Christmas ornaments, art prints, bumper stickers, coffee mugs, and more.
Do it yourself videos were also produced showing how fans could make their own toys based upon Grogu.
The top 47 unofficial Grogu products by Amazon merchants sold an average of 1,842 pieces of merchandise in the month following the show's release, at an average of $23 per product.
In mid-January 2020, Disney issued takedown notices against several Etsy sellers using the words "Star Wars", "Mandalorian", and "Yoda", citing copyright violations.
Official soft goods such as T-shirts were the first to be made available because they were the easiest to produce.
The first two official dolls of Grogu released were a 10-inch Funko figurine and an 11-inch plush toy from Mattel, which began shipping in February.
Pre-orders for the Funko doll made it the top toy on Amazon upon its release.
More official merchandise was expected to be released in early 2020.
In December 2019, the Electronic Arts video game The Sims 4 added "The Child Statue" as a purchasable decoration.
Several toys of Grogu were announced American International Toy Fair in New York City in February 2020, most notably a nearly life-sized animatronic Grogu toy by Hasbro, which moves, blinks, and makes sounds like the actual character.
The toy sold out within days of its announcement, with new deliveries not expected until December 2020.
Other toys announced at the Fair include a Grogu waffle iron, Chia Pets of Grogu, and a vehicle set as part of Hasbro's Mission Fleet toyline, which include the Mandalorian on a speeder bike and Grogu in his floating bassinet.
Build-A-Bear Workshop has also announced it will release a version of a Grogu doll in early 2020.
In August 2020, Lego released BrickHeadz figures of both Grogu and the Mandalorian, as well as a September 2020 release of a Lego set for the Mandalorian's Razor Crest spaceship, which included small figurine of Grogu, which has also appeared in the 2021 set Trouble on Tatooine (set 75299).
A large, buildable figure of Grogu has also been released, as well as a plush toy based on the minifigure.

===
In video games ===
In March 2020, an unofficial user-created mod for the video game Star Wars Battlefront II allowed the character BB-8 to be replaced with a playable version of Grogu.
Grogu appears in Fortnite Battle Royale as a pet that floats behind the player in-game.
He is the final reward of the Chapter 2 - Season 5 Battle Pass.
==
References ==


===
Citations ===


===
Works cited ===


==
External links ==
Grogu on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Asajj Ventress () is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise.
She first appeared as a supporting antagonist in the 2003 Clone Wars micro-series, voiced by Grey DeLisle.
Ventress returned as a major antagonist in the canonical 2008 animated film The Clone Wars and the follow-up television series of the same name, now voiced by Nika Futterman, though she eventually redeemed herself, becoming an anti-heroine.

A powerful Dark Jedi with exceptional lightsaber combat abilities, Ventress wields dual lightsabers with curved handles that can attach together and form a double bladed weapon with a curve in the middle.
Originally a Nightsister of Dathomir who was sold as a slave
, she later became a Jedi Padawan, and eventually an informal Sith apprentice to Count Dooku after falling to the dark side of the Force as a result of her Jedi Master's death in battle.
Trained as Dooku's personal assassin, Ventress was assigned various missions during the first years of the Clone Wars and came into conflict with the Jedi, primarily Obi-Wan Kenobi, Anakin Skywalker, and Ahsoka Tano.
However, after being betrayed and left for dead by Dooku on the orders of his master, Darth Sidious, Ventress rejoined the Nightsisters and attempted to exact revenge on Dooku, before settling on becoming a bounty hunter.
She later began to slowly redeem herself, helping her former Jedi enemies on several occasions, and was eventually completely redeemed in the 2015 novel Star Wars: Dark Disciple, but met her death at the hand of her former master, Dooku.

Aside from the television series, the character appears in several other forms of Star Wars media, both canon and non-canon, including books, comics, and video games.
Ventress became a favorite among fans, regularly placing in fan polls and Star Wars character ranking lists.

==
Characterization ==


===
Creation ===
Before the character of Count Dooku was developed, the art department for Star Wars:
Episode II – Attack of the Clones developed a villainess as a potential main antagonist.
When the Star Wars expanded universe resurrected this female Sith idea as one of Dooku's underlings who could appear more frequently throughout the Clone Wars, this nameless Separatist Commander was dubbed Juno Eclipse
but the name was rejected as "not villainous enough", and she was renamed Asajj Ventress.
The name Juno Eclipse was later given to a character featured in the video game
Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed, with no relation to Ventress.
LucasArts's Leland Chee suggested using "Asajj" as the character's first name, naming her after the character Asaji from Akira Kurosawa's Throne of Blood.

===
Portrayal ===
Asajj Ventress was voiced by Grey DeLisle in the 2003 Clone Wars micro-series, and by Nika Futterman in the 2008 animated film Star Wars: The Clone and its subsequent TV series, as well most of her video game and other animated appearances.

==
Appearances ==


===
The Clone Wars ===
Ventress is an antagonist in the 2008
The Clone Wars film.
As the disciple of Count Dooku, she helps him with his plan to turn Jabba the Hutt against the Galactic Republic by kidnapping his son Rotta.
Ventress fights Jedi Knight Anakin Skywalker and apprentice Ahsoka Tano, who rescue Rotta, and later also battles Jedi Master Obi-Wan Kenobi, who defeats her, forcing her to flee.

Ventress is a lead character in all five broadcast seasons of the subsequent The Clone Wars animated series.
In season one, Ventress travels to the moon of Rugosa as Dooku's emissary to form an alliance between the planet Toydaria and the Separatists.
The king of Toydaria is reluctant, but allows her forces to face Yoda in battle to prove which side is superior.
When the king decides to side with the Republic, Dooku gives his assassin permission to kill the king so they may have a better chance with the successor.
Yoda thwarts her attempt, however, and she is forced to flee.
Dooku orders Ventress to spy on the planet Kamino for the Separatist forces, planning an invasion with General Grievous to destroy the clone production facilities while stealing Jango Fett's DNA template from the production facility.
Ventress then frees Trade Federation Viceroy Nute Gunray from the custody of Luminara Unduli and Ahsoka, fighting the two Jedi before ultimately succeeding in her mission.

In season three, Ventress' back story is explained: she hails from the planet Dathomir and was sold by the Nightsisters to criminals.
She would have likely been killed in a pirate raid if not for Jedi Ky Narec, who had crashed on Rattatak.
Narec sensed her potential and trained her in the ways of the Force.
However, warlord Osika Kirske killed Narec before Ventress could become a full-fledged Jedi.
She developed an implacable hatred of the Jedi Order, which she believes abandoned her master and ignored the bloodshed on her planet.

Eventually, Darth Sidious comes to see Ventress as a liability, and orders Dooku to eliminate her.
Dooku attempts, unsuccessfully, to kill her, as she engages Anakin and Obi-Wan in one final duel, in which she is wounded.
She turns to the Nightsisters of Dathomir for help, and they engineer Savage Opress to serve as Dooku's new apprentice in order to earn his trust, before ultimately killing him on Ventress' behalf.
The scheme fails, however, when Opress turns on both Dooku and Ventress and attempts to kill them both.

In season four, Ventress returns to the Nightsisters.
She undergoes the ritual to become a full-fledged Nightsister, but is thwarted when Grievous' droid army slaughter the Nightsisters while their matriarch Mother Talzin is rendered incorporeal.
Told by Talzin to find her own path, Ventress later helps Boba Fett's team of bounty hunters in a dangerous but profitable mission.
She then finally makes peace with her past with an ideal future as a bounty hunter.
While still haunted by Opress, she tracks him to Raydonia to collect a bounty on him.
When she arrives on Opress’ spaceship, she confronts him and Darth Maul as they are about to kill Obi-Wan.
Ventress teams up with her old nemesis to fight Maul and Opress, but they are ultimately forced to escape in their shuttle.

In season five's final arc, Ventress nearly apprehends Ahsoka, who has been framed for attempting to destroy the Jedi Temple.
She ultimately helps Ahsoka escape on the condition that she would be exonerated.
Ventress later helps Anakin to find out that Barriss Offee framed Ahsoka.

In the 2015 novel Dark Disciple, based on unfinished episodes from The Clone Wars, Ventress teams up with undercover Jedi Master Quinlan Vos in an "un-Jedi like" mission to kill Dooku.
Ventress falls in love with Vos.
After Vos is turned to the dark side by Dooku, Ventress ultimately manages to redeem him, but she is killed by Dooku with Force lightning shortly after.
Vos later returns Ventress' body to Dathomir so that she may rejoin her fallen sisters in spirit.

===
Legends works ===
With the 2012 acquisition of Lucasfilm by The Walt Disney Company, most of the licensed Star Wars novels and comics produced since the originating 1977 film Star Wars were rebranded as Star Wars Legends and declared non-canon to the franchise in April 2014.

====
Clone Wars ====
Asajj Ventress first appeared as a supporting villain in the 2003 micro-series Star Wars: Clone Wars.
When Sith Lord Count Dooku arrives to add the planet Rattatak to his Separatist movement, he witnesses Ventress fighting several opponents in a large arena, defeating them all before claiming to be a Sith warrior.
When Dooku laughs aside the notion that she could be a Sith, Ventress tries to attack him, but the Sith Lord renders her unconscious with Force lightning.
After she awakens, Dooku attacks her again, but she jumps backwards and ignites her lightsabers.
In her quarters, a short duel takes place to which Dooku cuts her two lightsabers in half, rendering her defenseless.
Although Ventress is defeated, Dooku is impressed by her abilities and recruits her to be his apprentice by appealing to her hatred of the Jedi.

Darth Sidious later personally assigns Ventress to kill Anakin Skywalker, and Dooku presents the Dark Jedi with a new pair of lightsabers with curved hilts.
After Ventress leaves, Sidious remarks that she is certain to fail, but that she will serve as a useful test for Anakin.
Ventress then engages the Republic fighter forces in orbit of the planet Muunilinst and lures Anakin into a chase.
Ventress and Anakin go to Yavin IV, and a fierce battle from the forest to the Massassi temple takes place.
Though she initially gains the upper hand in their duel, Anakin calls upon his immense connection to the Force and brutally overpowers her, causing her to fall over the edge of a cliff.

====
Novels ====
As portrayed in the novel The Cestus Deception, Ventress appears on Ord Cestus during the Bio-Droid Crisis.
She is behind the X'Ting criminal Trillot's dealings with Obi-Wan.
Ventress also destroys the Republic Cruiser carrying Barrister Doolb Snoil returning to the Republic; however, Snoil survives.
Ventress later challenges Kenobi and his fellow Jedi Master Kit Fisto to a duel.
Ventress disarms Fisto but is then engaged by Kenobi.
Their duel leads them into an underwater chamber and Ventress is forced to escape after Kenobi slices her across her abdomen.
She lets loose a smoke bomb and flees back to the Confederacy and Dooku.

====
Comic books ====
In the Star Wars: Republic story "
The New Face of War", Ventress joins forces with the bounty hunter Durge on the invasion of Naboo's moon, Ohma-D'un.
Together they use swamp gas to wipe out the Gungan colony and prepare to launch a biological attack on Naboo.
In the ensuing battle with Republic forces, Ventress makes her first public appearance in the war (in the chronological timeline).
Ventress kills Jedi Master Glaive in the battle and cuts off his apprentice Zule's left arm.
She engages Obi-Wan and the pair are evenly matched.
Ventress escapes with Durge after ARC Trooper Alpha destroys their fueling station.

In Star Wars: Jedi - Mace Windu, Dooku sends Ventress to Ruul to help frame Mace Windu.
Ventress briefly confronts Sora Bulq, who had been secretly corrupted by Dooku, as a ruse.
Ventress kills Mira in the battle and then engages Jedi Masters Sian Jeisel, K' Kruhk and Rhad Tarn all of whom she defeats singlehandedly.
After framing Windu for the crime, Ventress corrupts Tarn.
While Tarn fights against Jeisel, Ventress defeats K'Kruhk in combat.
Windu's timely arrival saves the Jedi; Ventress finds that she is no match for Windu's power and is forced to flee.

In the Republic story "Blast Radius", Ventress and Durge again engage the Jedi taskforce in a facility on the planet Queyta.
Ventress briefly fights against Kenobi and Fay.
Durge kills Jon Antilles and Knol Ven'Nari.
After Ven'nari is killed in an explosion, Durge pushes Antilles into a lava pit.
Ventress uses her lightsabers to collapse the ceiling, sending a shower of lava onto Diath's head.
Although the Separatists claim a victory, Ventress spares Obi-Wan's life under Dooku's orders, though she impales Fay in the chest with her lightsabers.
Fay gives Obi-Wan the last of her strength to escape the facility.

In "The Battle of Jabiim", Ventress captures Obi-Wan and Alpha from Jabiim and transports them to Rattatak for torture and interrogation.
Obi-Wan and Alpha escape in the following story, "Hate & Fear", and the Jedi Master takes Ky Narec's lightsaber, making the animosity between him and Ventress deeply personal.

In "Dreadnoughts of Rendili", Ventress and fellow Dark Jedi Tol Skorr fight Obi-Wan and Quinlan Vos on Titavian IV.
Obi-Wan unleashes a rancor to distract Ventress, but she manipulates it via the dark side.
Obi-Wan fights Ventress after killing the rancor but he escapes with Vos before the duel is settled.
Grievous arrives to rescue the two Dark Jedi, shaming Ventress in their master Dooku's eyes.

Ventress then travels to Coruscant to kill Vos and Obi-Wan.
During the mission, she discovers Anakin's secret marriage to Senator Padmé Amidala.
Enraged, Anakin engages Ventress.
During the duel, Ventress scars Skywalker's face
but she is once again overpowered and suffers another huge fall.
Republic Intelligence assumes that she is dead.

"Obsession" marks the character's final appearance in Republic.
Ventress survives her encounter with Anakin on Coruscant but is badly injured.
She is sent to Boz Pity where Dooku places her in a bacta tank and fits her with cybernetic modifications.
One month later, Obi-Wan infiltrates the facility.
Ventress wakes up and subsequently attacks him.
She fights against both Obi-Wan and Anakin but is abandoned when Dooku orders an IG-100 MagnaGuard to kill her as she runs towards Dooku's shuttle.
Enraged and badly wounded, Ventress tries to kill Obi-Wan as he tries to help her.
Anakin slashes her from behind, mortally wounding her.
As she lies dying, she tells him the location of the Separatists' next target.
Believing Ventress to be dead, Obi-Wan puts her on a ship bound for Coruscant.
However, Ventress survives by placing herself in a Sith trance.
While on the shuttle, she emerges from her trance and orders the pilots to take her as far away as possible from Dooku, the Jedi, and the war.

==
Other media ==


===
Star Wars Battlefront:
Renegade Squadron ===
Ventress is also a villain in Star Wars Battlefront:
Renegade Squadron who can be used if the player is a Separatist and earns enough points to use her.
She is available as a character on the Saleucami and Sullust level.

===
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars video games ===
Ventress appears in the Star Wars:
The Clone Wars video game spin-offs:
She is a supporting villain in Star Wars:
The Clone Wars - Jedi Alliance where she is seen on Coruscant holding Ziro the Hutt hostage.
The Jedi have to defeat her in order to gain more information on the Nightsisters.

She also appears in Star Wars:
The Clone Wars - Republic Heroes also as a supporting villain to the game's plot.
She is fought in a boss battle with the Jedi characters Luminara Unduli and Aayla Secura.

Ventress appears in the game
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars - Lightsaber Duels as a playable character.

===
Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed
duology ===
Ventress has a non-canon appearance in the PlayStation 2, Wii, and PlayStation Portable versions of Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed as a costume skin that can be used on Starkiller, the main character of the game.
In the Wii version, she is also a playable character in the 2-player fighting game mode called Duel Mode.

She is also a playable multiplayable character for the Wii version of the sequel, Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed II.
===
Other Star Wars video games ===
The character is featured in several Star Wars games that were released after Disney's acquisition of Lucasfilm:

Ventress appears in the tower defense game
Star Wars: Galactic Defense as a playable character for the Dark Side campaign, and a boss for the Light Side campaign.

Ventress is a playable character in Star Wars: Galaxy of Heroes, a turn-based RPG.
She is classified as a Nightsister and a Separatist support, armed with powerful area of effect moves, and can grow stronger when characters are defeated.

Ventress is a playable character in Lego Star Wars:
The Force Awakens via downloadable content.

Ventress is mentioned in the 2017 reboot of Star Wars: Battlefront II.

Ventress is indirectly mentioned in the 2019 video game Star Wars Jedi:
Fallen Order, when Nightsister survivor Merrin talks about the Nightsisters killed during the Clone Wars.
==
Relationships ==


===
Mentorship tree ===


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Asajj Ventress in the StarWars.com Databank
Asajj Ventress on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Maz Kanata is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise.
Introduced in the 2015 film Star Wars: The Force Awakens, she is a computer-generated imagery character voiced and performed through motion capture by Lupita Nyong'o.
Maz, a former pirate and smuggler, is more than 1,000 years old and manages an interstellar tavern in a castle on the fictional planet Takodana.
While Maz's small role in the trilogy has been criticized, Nyong'o's performance and the technical aspects of the character have been praised by critics.
For her performance in The Force Awakens, Nyong'o was nominated for a Saturn Award for Best Supporting Actress.

==
Character ==


===
Concept and creation ===
The Force Awakens
writer/director J. J. Abrams told Entertainment Weekly in November 2015, "I wanted to do [Maz] as a puppet originally, but once we figured out the things that she was required to do, it felt like performance capture was the way to go."
With most of the other creatures in her scenes being practical effects, Abrams noted:

Maz needed to look and feel and be just like one of those creatures.
And given her mobility, and given the role that she played, it became clear that that was one creature where we should use the tool of CG.
But the performance was all Lupita.
She was there on set, and we did capture sessions afterwards as well.

Abrams said, "I had some specific ideas about how she would work and what she would do.
I had this pitch about these goggles that she wore.
Her eyes are an important aspect of her character, and you'll see how it plays out."
Abrams told his home town newspaper, the Palisadian-Post, that he based Maz on his late Palisades Charter High School English teacher Rose Gilbert.
He said:

We really wanted the story to feel authentic, despite being a wild fantasy.
I mentioned Rose in an early story meeting as a sort of timeless, wise figure that I'd actually known in my life ...
While we experimented with many looks and styles before settling on the character's final design, Rose was always at the center of the inspiration for Maz.

For The Rise of Skywalker, Maz was created using animatronic puppetry.

===
Portrayal ===
Nyong'o's meeting with Abrams about an undisclosed role was reported in March 2014, and her casting in the film was first announced on April 29, 2014.
Nyong'o was revealed to be playing a performance capture-CGI character, pirate Maz Kanata, in a May 2015 Vanity Fair photo shoot by Annie Leibovitz.
The character was first heard in the official TV spot for The Force Awakens, released in November 2015.
Days later Abrams confirmed fan speculation that Maz was pictured on the film's theatrical poster, which had been previously released in October 2015, as a diminutive alien wearing large goggles.
In December 2015, the orange-skinned character appeared briefly in a video for the Disney XD channel, featuring a scene in which John Boyega's character Finn draws his lightsaber.
Of Abrams' emphasis on the character's eyes, Nyong'o commented, "As an actor for films, your eyes are a lot of the way you communicate anyway.
So it was definitely a gift to have that be the means to her magic as a motion-capture character.
"
Nyong'o was also coached on performance-capture work by her
The Force Awakens costar Andy Serkis, who portrays CGI character Supreme Leader Snoke and had previously portrayed numerous other motion-capture roles in other films.
She said, "The biggest advice he gave me, that was so important to hold on to, is a motion-capture character you develop the same way as any other.
You have to understand who the character is and what makes them who they are.
"Actress
Arti Shah was cast as the motion capture double for the character's body movements.
===
Description ===
Maz is a diminutive, humanoid alien with orange-tinted skin who wears large goggles.
A former pirate and smuggler, she runs an interstellar tavern in a castle on the planet
Takodana.
Abrams said of her backstory:
Her history is that she was a pirate for a long time.
She's lived over a thousand years.
She's had this watering hole for about a century, and it's like another bar that you'd find in a corner of the Star Wars universe.

Abrams added that "her eyes are an important aspect of her character".
Entertainment Weekly's Anthony Breznican noted, "Maz is this movie's wise, ancient alien with connections to the mystical side of the galaxy."
Of the character's alien species and planetary origins, Abrams said that though The Force Awakens does not answer these questions, more information about Maz is forthcoming "in other venues".

==
Appearances ==


===
Film ===


====
The Force Awakens (2015) ====
In the film, Han Solo visits his old friend Maz at her tavern, seeking her aid in returning the wayward astromech droid BB-8 to the Resistance.
Maz, who has a crush on Han's copilot, the Wookiee Chewbacca, is intrigued by Han's companions, the renegade Stormtrooper Finn (FN2187) and the scavenger Rey.
First Order stormtroopers, led by Kylo Ren, attack Maz's castle in search of BB-8, who has been entrusted with an important map.
Maz tries to give Luke Skywalker's long-missing lightsaber to the Force-sensitive Rey, but she refuses it after experiencing a disturbing vision from touching it.
Maz then entrusts the lightsaber to Finn, who uses it multiple times before it is eventually claimed by Rey.
=====
Deleted scene =====
One trailer for the film included a shot of Maz handing Luke's lightsaber to General Leia Organa, though the corresponding scene was not included in the final cut of the film.
Abrams explained the removal, saying "Maz used to continue along with the characters back to the Resistance base, but we realized that she really had nothing to do there of value, except to be sitting around."
====
The Last Jedi (2017) ====
In December 2015, producer Kathleen Kennedy confirmed that Nyong'o was among those who would reprise their roles in the forthcoming sequel to The Force Awakens,
Star Wars: The Last Jedi.
In the film, Maz appears in one brief scene via hologram, aiding Poe Dameron, Finn and Rose Tico by instructing them to find the Master Codebreaker in Canto Bight.
She is shown in the midst of a firefight, which she calls "a union dispute".
====
The Rise of Skywalker (2019) ====
Maz appears in a minor role in Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker, with Nyong'o reprising the role.
She is shown being a part of the rebellion, helping them prepare for war.
She is present in most scenes with General Leia, who appeared using unused footage from The Force Awakens; Maz's main purpose in the film is to explain Leia's actions and mourn for her upon her death.
In the celebrations at the end of the film, Maz gives Chewbacca Han's old medal, a callback to the final scene of A New Hope in which Luke and Han received awards and Chewbacca did not.
===
Animated series ===


====
Lego:
Star Wars (2016) ====
Maz appears in the short form computer animated series Lego Star Wars: The Resistance Rises in the 2016 episode "Hunting for Han".
The character also appeared in the Lego Star Wars:
The Freemaker Adventures episode
The Test.
====
Forces of Destiny (2017) ====
Maz appears in the micro-series Star Wars Forces of Destiny, voiced by Lupita Nyong'o.
===
Video games ===
Maz is also a playable character in Lego Star Wars: The Force Awakens.
Her role in the game is basically the same as in the film, although she has a prominent role during the battle of Takodana (in Chapter 6).

Maz also stars in Star Wars: Battlefront 2, being in the campaign.
She helps Han Solo by giving him a tip-off of information.

===
Merchandising ===
Maz is featured in a Lego Star Wars playset called Battle on Takodana, and Hasbro's Star Wars:
The Force Awakens
Takodana Encounter action figure set.
The character also appears in the 2015 novelization of The Force Awakens by Alan Dean Foster.

== Reception ==
Time's Stephanie Zacharek described Maz as "a delightful minor character ... who looks like the love child of E.T. and Lena Horne".
Richard Roeper of the Chicago Sun-Times named Maz one of the film's "miraculous creatures", and James Robins of the New Zealand Listener deemed the character "a charmingly rendered alien".
Writing for Forbes, Scott Mendelson called the scenes at Maz's castle
"the film’s best sequence".
Conversely, Matt Goldberg of Collider described the character as "the bar-owner/Yoda stand-in/exposition mouthpiece" and wrote, "What could have been a strong addition to the franchise instead reeks of the film’s attempt to mimic what works well in the previous movies.
"The
Force Awakens received seven Visual Effects Society Award nominations, including one for Outstanding Animated Performance in a Photoreal Feature for Maz Kanata.
Nyong'o was nominated for a 2016 Saturn Award for Best Supporting Actress for her portrayal.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Maz Kanata in the StarWars.com Databank
Maz Kanata on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Supreme Leader Snoke is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise.
He was created by J. J. Abrams, Lawrence Kasdan, and Michael Arndt for the 2015 film Star Wars:
The Force Awakens, in which he is introduced as the Supreme Leader of the First Order, a rogue military junta formed from the fallen Galactic Empire.
In the films, Snoke is a CGI character voiced and performed by Andy Serkis via motion capture.

The character appears as a main villain in the first two films of the sequel trilogy—
The Force Awakens (2015) and
The Last Jedi (2017)—and is referenced in The Rise of Skywalker (2019).
The Star Wars universe establishes Snoke as a Force-sensitive artificial being who was created by Emperor Palpatine to reclaim control of the galaxy.
As Palpatine's puppet ruler, Snoke seduces Luke Skywalker's nephew, Ben Solo, to serve the First Order as Kylo Ren.
Aside from the films, Snoke appears in related Star Wars media.

==
Character ==


===
Development ===
Snoke's appearance changed throughout principal photography and post-production of The Force Awakens.
Andy Serkis said, "It's the first time I've been on set
not yet knowing what the character's gonna look like.
I mean, talk about secrecy!"
According to the actor, the character's appearance, voice, and movements evolved as he and the film's writer/director J. J. Abrams challenged the visual effects team.
According to The Force Awakens senior sculptor Ivan Manzella, "Snoke almost became a female at one point.
J. J. picked out a maquette he liked and then we took it to a full-size version, sculpted in plasteline.
J. J. and [creature creative supervisor Neal Scanlan] didn't want him to be old and decrepit, like [Emperor Palpatine].
"

===
Portrayal ===
While Serkis secretly joined the project in February 2014, his casting in The Force Awakens was first announced on April 29, 2014.
When asked about his role in July 2014, he joked, "I'm not Yoda."
In May 2015, a StarWars.com interview with photographer Annie Leibovitz about her
The Force Awakens shoot for Vanity Fair
revealed that Serkis would be playing a CGI character named Supreme Leader Snoke, and featured an image of the actor in motion capture gear.
Serkis had previously played several CGI characters using motion capture technology, including Gollum in The Lord of the Rings film series (2001–2003), the titular ape in 2005's King Kong, and Caesar in the Planet of the Apes reboot series.
In November 2015, Serkis said of the process of creating Snoke:

When we first started working on it, [Abrams] had some rough notions of how Snoke was gonna look, but it really hadn't been fully-formed and it almost came out of discussion and performance ...
We shot on set of course, and I was in the scenes I have with other actors, but the beauty of this process is you can go back and reiterate, keep informing and honing beats and moments.
So J.J., after we shot last year, we've had a series of sessions where I'd be in London at The Imaginarium, my studio, while he’s been directing from L.A., and we've literally been creating further additions and iterations to the character.
That's been fascinating.
And in the meantime I've been able to see the look and design of the character grow and change as the performances change.
So it's been really exciting in that respect.

According to Serkis' costar Lupita Nyong'o, who played the CGI character Maz Kanata in The Force Awakens, the actor coached her on performance-capture work, telling Nyong'o that "a motion-capture character you develop the same way as any other.
You have to understand who the character is and what makes them who they are."
Serkis said of filming:

It was quite an unusual situation.
I worked specifically with Domhnall Gleeson and with Adam Driver.
My first day was basically standing on a 25-foot podium doing Lord Snoke without the faintest idea what he looked like ... or in fact who he was!
I was very high up, totally on my own, away from everybody else, but acting with them ...
we used sort of a "Kongolizer" method of having sound come out of speakers to give a sense of scale and distance for the character.
So it was very challenging and scary, in fact probably one of my most scary film experiences I’ve ever had.

Costume designer Michael Kaplan had the idea to give Snoke gold robes to contrast from his red and black throne room in The Last Jedi.
Director Rian Johnson said the red motif was intended to evoke curtains in a nod to The Wizard of Oz, in which the titular character hides behind a curtain.
The throne room was designed to look theatrical as opposed to Palpatine's, which was more utilitarian.
The conceptual designers of the set were inspired by unused concept art for Return of the Jedi depicting the Emperor's lava-based lair under the surface of Coruscant.
According to The Last Jedi: The Visual Dictionary (2017), the gold ring Snoke wears is set with obsidian from Darth Vader's castle on Mustafar.
The glyphs it is set with are a reference to four philosophers Palpatine had statues of in his office, first seen in Star Wars:
Episode II – Attack of the Clones.
Additionally, Palpatine's theme can be heard during the scene in which Snoke tortures Rey.
===
Description ===
Snoke, whom Abrams called "a powerful figure on the dark side of the Force", was introduced as the leader of the First Order and master to the sequel trilogy's primary villain, Kylo Ren.
Serkis described Snoke as "quite an enigmatic character, and strangely vulnerable at the same time as being quite powerful.
Obviously he has a huge agenda.
He has suffered a lot of damage."
Serkis called Snoke "a new character in this universe", adding "I think it'd be fair to say that he is aware of the past to a great degree.
"Explaining
why CGI was the only way to create Snoke's unique appearance, Serkis said before the film's premiere, "The scale of him, for instance, is one reason.
He is large.
He appears tall.
And also just the facial design—you couldn't have gotten there with prosthetics ...
he has a very distinctive, idiosyncratic bone and facial structure.
"
Chief of creature and droid effects Neal Scanlan said, "This character is much better executed as a CGI character.
That's just a practical reality when he's 7-foot-something tall; he's very, very thin.
"
Snoke's "scarred, cavernous face" was not revealed before the release of the film, in which he appears as a "massive, ominous hologram".
The character's deep voice was first heard in the teaser trailer released on November 28, 2014.Robbie Collin of The Telegraph described the disfigured and skeletal Snoke as a "sepulchral horror", Richard Roeper of the Chicago Sun-Times called him "hissing and grotesque", and Andrew O'Hehir of Salon dubbed the character "a spectral demonic figure".
Variety's Justin Chang wrote that Snoke resembled "a plus-sized, more articulate Gollum", and Chris Nashawaty of Entertainment Weekly described him as "essentially Emperor Palpatine crossed with one of the aliens from Close Encounters."
Stephanie Zacharek of Time called the character "a giant, scary, noseless dude who sits placidly in an oversized chair like a dark-lord version of the Lincoln Monument.
"There were multiple fan theories regarding the origins and identity of Snoke, including that he was Darth Plagueis, a Sith Lord anecdotally mentioned in Star Wars:
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith and the mentor of Palpatine, allegedly possessing the power to prevent death; Palpatine himself, "the Operator" Gallius Rax, a mysterious First Order manipulator from Chuck Wendig's Aftermath novel trilogy; or Ezra Bridger, a main character from the animated series Star Wars Rebels.
Pablo Hidalgo of the Lucasfilm Story Group dismissed the Darth Plagueis theory in May 2016, and Rax's death in the 2017 novel Aftermath: Empire's End disproved that theory as well.
In the context of the story, Snoke was created by Palpatine.
According to The Rise of Skywalker: The Visual Dictionary (2019), Snoke's physical appearance was purposefully designed by Palpatine to ensure his species remained unidentifiable.
Furthermore, Snoke's reluctance to meet in person with his First Order underlings helped conceal the fact that he was an artificial being.
General Pryde (Richard E. Grant), a supporting villain in The Rise of Skywalker,
was one of the few characters who knew Snoke was subservient to a higher power (Palpatine).

==
Appearances ==


===
Film ===


====
The Force Awakens (2015) ====
In his first appearance in the film, Snoke is introduced as Supreme Leader of the First Order, and master to Kylo Ren (Adam Driver).
Seduced to the dark side by Snoke, the masked Kylo is really Ben Solo, the son of Han Solo (Harrison Ford) and Leia Organa (Carrie Fisher).
Snoke senses an "awakening" in the Force, and warns Ren that the limits of his power will be tested when he faces his father in pursuit of the wayward droid BB-8, which carries a map to the missing Luke Skywalker (Mark Hamill).
Later, Snoke orders General Hux (Domnhall Gleeson) to destroy the New Republic with the Starkiller superweapon.
He then orders Ren to bring Rey (Daisy Ridley) to him after she refuses to disclose the map to Luke.
After Ren is defeated in a lightsaber duel with Rey, Snoke orders Hux to bring Ren to him to complete his training.

====
The Last Jedi (2017) ====
Following the events of The Force Awakens, Snoke leads the First Order forces as they pursue the outnumbered Resistance.
He reprimands Hux for his failings as a military leader, and Kylo Ren for his failure to find and kill Luke Skywalker.
Towards the end of the film, Ren brings Rey to Snoke, who tortures her for information on Luke's location.
Snoke reveals that he created a psychic bond between Ren and Rey as part of a plan to destroy Luke.
He then orders Ren to kill Rey.
Ren, however, kills Snoke by using the Force to cut him in half with a lightsaber.
Ren then declares himself the new Supreme Leader of the First Order, pinning Snoke's death on Rey.
====
The Rise of Skywalker (2019) ====
In The Rise of Skywalker, Kylo Ren finds several clones resembling Snoke at Palpatine's (Ian McDiarmid) lair on the Sith world Exegol.
Snoke's voice is briefly used by Palpatine when talking to Ren.
It is revealed that Palpatine had created Snoke as a puppet to lure Ren towards the dark side, and to reclaim the galaxy through the First Order.

===
Related works ===
Snoke appears in the 2015 novelization of The Force Awakens by Alan Dean Foster.
In the novel, Leia tells Han in more detail how Snoke, aware that their son would be "strong with the Force" and possess "equal potential for good or evil", had long watched Ben and manipulated events to draw him to the dark side.
An unplayable Lego minifigure version of Snoke appears in cutscenes in the 2016 video game Lego Star Wars: The Force Awakens.
In the spring of 2018, Snoke was added to the mobile MOBA Star Wars: Force Arena as a playable Dark Side squad leader.
Canon works reveal that Snoke acquired Palpatine's Senate office.
Prior to the release of The Rise of Skywalker, the 2019 comic book Star Wars: Age of Resistance – Supreme Leader Snoke implied a direct connection between Snoke and Palpatine.
In the book, Snoke speaks of Luke Skywalker to Kylo Ren, stating, "If I had your uncle by my side instead of you, the galaxy would have been mine a long time ago".

== Reception ==
Todd McCarthy of The Hollywood Reporter wrote, "Supreme Leader Snoke is a larger-than-life, vaguely Harry Potter-ish hologram voiced with deep gravity by Andy Serkis; the full weight of this character's malignancy and dramatic power will presumably be better assessed in subsequent episodes."
Richard Roeper of the Chicago Sun-Times called Serkis "the undisputed champion of the performance-capture roles".
Though praising the "unobtrusive sophistication" of the visual effects used to portray the character, Variety's Justin Chang said that Serkis is "fine but not galvanizing" in the role.
Lindsay Bahr of the Associated Press deemed Snoke one of the "less memorable" characters in The Force Awakens.
In 2016, Serkis was nominated for an MTV Movie Award for Best Virtual Performance for the role.
Some viewers felt that Snoke's character arc was underdeveloped.
Various fan theories about his origins were held so strongly among some viewers that it was difficult for them to accept his demise in The Last Jedi.
Serkis addressed the criticisms by saying producers wanted the character "to have a great deal of mystery", but that he "has been asked to not shed anything
should they want to bring him back in any way, whether prequel or whatever".
Forbes criticized The Force Awakens for not developing Snoke as a character, or exploring his backstory and inexplicable rise to power after the events of the original trilogy, calling the character "a bandage poorly placed over a gaping plot-hole".
Serkis acknowledged that some fans found the lack of backstory "incredibly frustrating", but suggested this as an opportunity to layer Snoke in a future story.
Despite the criticisms towards the writing, Forbes praised Serkis' performance in both films, and was much more positive towards his appearance in The Last Jedi, highlighting his death and his relationship with his apprentice, Kylo Ren.
==
References ==


==
External links ==
Supreme Leader Snoke in the StarWars.com Databank
Snoke on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
